Conclusion

It was only five days after People’s Liberation Army forces began shelling the Taiwanese-held Quemoy Island in 1958 that, amid the sweltering Dallas summer, Jack Kilby demonstrated to his colleagues that all the components of a circuit—transistors, resistors, and capacitors—could bemade from semiconductor materials. Four days after that, Jay Lathrop pulled into the Texas Instruments parking lot for the first time. He’d already filed for a patent on the process of making transistors via photolithography but had yet to receive the Army prize that enabled him to buy a new station wagon. Several months earlier, Morris Chang had left his job at a Massachusetts electronics firm and moved to Texas Instruments, earning a reputation for a nearly magical ability to eliminate errors from TI’s semiconductor fabrication processes. That same year, Pat Haggerty was named president of Texas Instruments, with the board of directors betting that his vision of building electronics for military systems was a better business than producing the oil exploration instruments that the company had been founded to create. Haggerty had already assembled a talented team ofengineers like Weldon Word, who were building the electronics needed for “smart” weapons and accurate sensors.

Texas was on the opposite side of the world from Taiwan, but it wasn’t a coincidence that Kilby invented his integrated circuit amid aU.S.-China crisis. Defense dollars were flowing into electronics firms. The U.S. military was relying on technology to preserve its edge. With Soviet Russia and Communist China building industrial-scale militaries, the U.S. couldn’t count on fielding bigger armies or more tanks. Itcouldbuild more transistors, more precise sensors, and more effective communications equipment, all of which would eventually make American weapons far more capable.

Nor was it a coincidence that Morris Chang was seeking work in Texas rather than, say, Tianjin. For an ambitious child of an upper-class family, staying in China risked harassment or even death. Amid Cold War chaos and the disruptions of decolonization that swept the world, the best and the brightest from many countries tried to make their way to the United States. John Bardeen and Walter Brattain invented the first transistor, but it was their Bell Labs colleagues Mohamed Atalla and Dawon Kahng who devised a transistor structure that could be mass-produced. Two of the “traitorous eight” engineers who founded Fairchild Semiconductor with Bob Noyce were born outside the United States. A few years later, a sharp-elbowed Hungarian émigré formerly known as Andras Grof helped Fairchild optimize the use of chemicals in the company’s chipmaking processes and set himself on a path to becoming CEO.

At a time when most of the world had never heard of silicon chips, and still fewer understood anything about how they worked, America’s centers of semiconductor production were drawing the world’s most brilliant minds to Texas, Massachusetts, and above all to California. These engineers and physicists were driven by the belief that miniaturizing transistors could quite literally change the future. They were proven right far beyond their wildest dreams. Visionaries like Gordon Moore and Caltech professor Carver Mead saw decades ahead, but Moore’s prediction from 1965 of“home computers” and “personal portable communications equipment” barely begins to describe the centrality of chips in our lives today. The idea that the semiconductor industry would eventually produce more transistors each daythan there arecells in the human body was something the founders of Silicon Valley would have found inconceivable.

As the industry’s scaled up, and transistors have scaled down, the need for vast, global markets is more important than ever. Today, even the Pentagon’s $700 billion budget isn’t big enough to afford facilities for building cutting-edge chips for defense purposes on U.S. soil. The Defense Department has dedicated shipyards for billion-dollar submarines and ten-billion-dollar aircraft carriers, but it buys many of the chips it uses from commercial suppliers, often in Taiwan. Even the cost ofdesigninga leading-edge chip, which can exceed $100 million, is getting too expensive for the Pentagon. A facility to fabricate the most advanced logic chips costs twice as much as an aircraft carrier but will only be cutting-edge for a couple of years.

The staggering complexity of producing computing power shows that Silicon Valley isn’t simply a story of science or engineering. Technology only advances when it finds a market. The history of the semiconductor is also a story of sales, marketing, supply chain management, and cost reduction. Silicon Valley wouldn’t exist without the entrepreneurs who built it. Bob Noyce was an MIT-trained physicist, but he made his mark as a businessman, perceiving a vast market for a product that didn’t yet exist. Fairchild Semiconductor’s ability to “cram more components onto integrated circuits”—as Gordon Moore put it in his famous 1965 article—depended not only on the company’s physicists and chemists, but also on hard-driving manufacturing bosses like Charlie Sporck. Pursuing union-free fabs and offering stock options to most employees drove productivity relentlessly higher. Transistors today cost far less than a millionth of their 1958 price thanks to the spirit expressed by the now-forgotten Fairchild employee who wrote on his exit survey when leaving the company:“I… WANT… TO… GET… RICH.”

On reflection, it’s too simple to say that the chip made the modern world, because our society and our politics have structured how chips were researched, designed, produced, assembled, and used. For example, DARPA, the Pentagon’s R&D unit, has literally shaped thesemiconductor by funding crucial research into the 3D transistor structures, called FinFETs, used in the most advanced logic chips. And in the future China’s deluge of subsidies will profoundly reshape the semiconductor supply chain, whether China achieves its goal of semiconductor supremacy or not.

There’s no guarantee, of course, that chips will remain as important as they’ve been in the past. Our demand for computing power is unlikely ever to diminish, but wecouldrun out of supply. Gordon Moore’s famous law is only a prediction, not a fact of physics. Industry luminaries from Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang to former Stanford president and Alphabet chairman John Hennessy havedeclared Moore’s Law dead. At some point, the laws of physics will make it impossible to shrink transistors further. Even before then, it could become too costly to manufacture them. The rate of cost declines has already significantly slowed. The tools needed to make ever-smaller chips are staggeringly expensive, none more so than the EUV lithography machines that cost more than $100 million each.

The end of Moore’s Law would be devastating for the semiconductor industry—and for the world. We produce more transistors each year only because it’s economically viable to do so. This isn’t the first time, though, that Moore’s Law has been declared near dead. In 1988, Erich Bloch, an esteemed expert at IBM and later head of the National Science Foundation, declared that Moore’s Law would stop working when transistors shrank to a quarter of a micron—a barrier that the industrybashed through a decade later. Gordon Moore worried in a 2003 presentation that “business as usual will certainly bump up against barriers in the next decade or so,” but all these potential barriers were overcome. At the time, Moore thought a 3D transistor structure was a“radical idea,” but less than two decades later, we’ve already produced trillions of these 3D FinFET transistors. Carver Mead, the Caltech professor who coined the phrase “Moore’s Law,” shocked the world’s semiconductor scientists with his prediction half a century ago that chips might eventually contain 100 million transistors per square centimeter. Today, themost advanced fabs can squeezea hundred times as many transistors on a chip than even Mead thought possible.

The durability of Moore’s Law, in other words, has surprised even the person who it’s named after and the person who coined it. It may well surprise today’s pessimists, too. Jim Keller, the star semiconductor designer who’s widely credited for transformative work on chips at Apple, Tesla, AMD, and Intel, has said he seesa clear path toward a fifty times increase in the density with which transistors can be packed on chips. First, he argues, existing fin-shaped transistors can be printed thinner to allow three times as many to be packed together. Next, fin-shaped transistors will be replaced by new tube-shaped transistors, often called “gate-all-around.” These are wire-shaped tubes that let an electric field be applied from all directions—top, sides, and bottom—providing better control of the “switch” to cope with challenges as transistors shrink. These tiny wires will double the density at which transistors can be packed, Keller argues. Stacking these wires on top of each other can increase density eight times further, he predicts. This adds up to a roughly fifty times increase in the number of transistors that can fit on a chip. “We’re not running out of atoms,” Keller has said. “We know how to print single layers of atoms.”

For all the talk of Moore’s Law ending, there’s more money than ever before flowing into the chip industry. Startups designing chips optimized for AI algorithms have raised billions of dollars in the past few years, each hoping that they can become the next Nvidia. Big tech firms—Google, Amazon, Microsoft, Apple, Facebook, Alibaba, and others—are now pouring money into designing their own chips. There’s clearly no deficit of innovation.

The best argument in favor of the thesis that Moore’s Law is ending is that all this new activity in chips for specific purposes, or even for individual companies, is displacing the improvements in “general-purpose” computing that Intel’s regular cadence of ever-more-powerful microprocessors provided for the past half century. Neil Thompson and Svenja Spanuth, two researchers, have gone so far as to argue thatwe’re seeing a “decline of computers as a general purpose technology.” They think the future of computing will be divided between “ ‘fast lane’ applications that get powerful customized chips and ‘slow lane’ applications that get stuck using general-purpose chips whose progress fades.”

It’s undeniable that the microprocessor, the workhorse of modern computing, is being partially displaced by chips made for specific purposes. What’s less clear is whether this is a problem. Nvidia’s GPUs are not general purpose like an Intel microprocessor, in the sense that they’re designed specifically for graphics and, increasingly, AI. However, Nvidia and other companies offering chips that are optimized for AI have made artificial intelligence far cheaper to implement, and therefore more widely accessible. AI has become a lot more “general purpose” today than was conceivable a decade ago, largely thanks to new, more powerful chips.

The recent trend of big tech firms like Amazon and Google designing their own chips marks another change from recent decades. Both Amazon and Google entered the chip design business to improve the efficiency of the servers that run their publicly available clouds. Anyone can access Google’s TPU chips on Google’s cloud for a fee. The pessimistic view is to see this as a bifurcation of computing into a“slow lane” and a “fast lane.” What’s surprising though, is how easy it is for almost anyone to access the fast lane by buying an Nvidia chip or by renting access to an AI-optimized cloud.

Moreover, it’s easier than ever before tocombine different types of chips. In the past, a device would often have a single processor chip. Now it might have multiple processors, some focused on general operations, with others optimized to manage specific features like a camera. This is possible because new packaging technologies make it easier to connect chips efficiently, letting companies easily swap certain chips in or out of a device as processing requirements or cost considerations change. Big chipmakers are now putting more thought than ever before into the systems in which their chips will operate. So the important question isn’t whether we’re finally reaching the limits of Moore’s Lawas Gordon Moore initially defined it—exponential increase in the number of transistors per chip—but whether we’ve reached a peak in the amount of computing power a chip can cost-effectively produce. Many thousands of engineers and many billions of dollars are betting not.

Back in December 1958—the same year that saw Morris Chang, Pat Haggerty, Weldon Word, Jay Lathrop, and Jack Kilby all assembled at Texas Instruments—an electronics conference took place in a wintry Washington, D.C. Attending that day were Chang, Gordon Moore, and Bob Noyce, who all went out for beers and then, in the day’s waning hours, meandered back to their hotel, young and excited,singing amid the snowdrifts. No one they passed in the street would have guessed these were three future titans of technology. Yet they’ve left an enduring imprint not only on billions of silicon wafers but on all our lives. The chips they invented and the industry they built provide the hidden circuitry that’s structured our history and will shape our future.