CHAPTER 42Made in China

“Without cybersecurity there is no national security,” declared Xi Jinping, general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, in 2014, “and without informatization, there is no modernization.” The son of one of China’s earliest Communist Party leaders, Xi had studied engineering in college before ascending the ranks of Chinese politics thanks to his chameleonlike knack for appearing to be whatever a given audience thought it wanted. To Chinese nationalists, his program of a “Chinese Dream” promised national rejuvenation and great power status. To businesses, he pledged economic reform. Some foreigners even saw him as a closet democrat, with theNew Yorkerdeclaring right after he took power that Xi was “a leader who realizes that China mustundertake real political reform.” The only certainty was Xi’s talent as a politician. His own views were hidden behind pursed lips and a feigned smile.

Behind this smile is a gnawing sense of insecurity that has driven Xi’s policies during the decade he’s ruled China. The primary risk, he believed, was the digital world. Most observers thought Xi had little to fear when it came to guaranteeing his own digital security. China’s leaders have the world’s most effective system of internet control, employingmany thousands of censors to police online chatter. China’s firewall made a huge swath of the internet inaccessible to its citizens,decisively disproving Western predictions that the internet would be a liberalizing political force. Xi felt strong enough online to mock the Western belief that the internet would spread democratic values. “The internet has turned the world into aglobal village,” Xi declared, sidestepping the fact that many of the world’s most popular websites, like Google and Facebook, were banned in China. He had a different type of global network in mind than the utopians of the early internet age—a network that China’s government could use to project power. “We must march out, deepen international internet exchange and collaboration, and vigorously participate in the construction of ‘One Belt, One Road,’ ” he declared on a different occasion, referring to his plan to enmesh the world in Chinese-built infrastructure that included not only roads and bridges but network equipment and censorship tools.

No country has been more successful than China at harnessing the digital world for authoritarian purposes. It has tamed America’s tech giants. Google and Facebook were banned and replaced by homegrown firms like Baidu and Tencent, which, technologically, are close matches with their American rivals. The U.S. tech firms that have won access to the Chinese market, like Apple and Microsoft, were allowed in only after agreeing to collaborate with Beijing’s censorship efforts. Far more than any other country, China has made the internet subservient to its leaders’ wishes. Foreign internet and software companies either signed on to whatever censorship rules the Communist Party desired or lost access to a vast market.

Why, then, was Xi Jinping worried about digital security? The more China’s leaders studied their technological capabilities, the less important their internet companies seemed. China’s digital world runs on digits—1s and 0s—that are processed and stored mostly by imported semiconductors. China’s tech giants depend on data centers full of foreign, largely U.S.-produced, chips. The documents that Edward Snowden leaked in 2013 before fleeing to Russia demonstrated American network-tapping capabilities that surprised even the cyber sleuths in Beijing. Chinese firms had replicated Silicon Valley’s expertise inbuilding software for e-commerce, online search, and digital payments. But all this software relies on foreign hardware. When it comes to the core technologies that undergird computing, China is staggeringly reliant on foreign products, many of which are designed in Silicon Valley and almost all of which are produced by firms based in the U.S. or one of its allies.

Xi thought this presented an untenable risk. “However great its size, however high its market capitalization, if an internet enterprise critically relies on the outside world for core components, the‘vital gate’ of the supply chain is grasped in the hands of others,” Xi declared in 2016. Which core technologies most worry Xi? One is a software product, Microsoft Windows, which is used by most PCs in China, despite repeated efforts to develop competitive Chinese operating systems. Yet even more important in Xi’s thinking are the chips that power China’s computers, smartphones, and data centers. As he noted, “Microsoft’s Windows operating system can only bepaired with Intel chips.” Somost computers in China needed American chips to function. During most years of the 2000s and 2010s, China spentmore money importing semiconductors than oil. High-powered chips were as important as hydrocarbons in fueling China’s economic growth. Unlike oil, though, the supply of chips is monopolized by China’s geopolitical rivals.

Most foreigners struggled to comprehend why China felt nervous. Hadn’t the country built vast tech firms worth hundreds of billions of dollars? Newspaper headlines repeatedly declared China one of the world’s leading tech powers. When it came to artificial intelligence, the country was one of the world’s twoAI Superpowers, according to a widely discussed book by Kai-Fu Lee, former head of Google China. Beijing built a twenty-first-century fusion of AI and authoritarianism, maximizing use ofsurveillance technology. But even the surveillance systems that track China’s dissidents and its ethnic minoritiesrely on chips from American companies like Intel and Nvidia. All of China’s most important technology rests on a fragile foundation of imported silicon.

Chinese leaders didn’t need to be paranoid to think their country should build more chips at home. It wasn’t just about avoiding supply chain vulnerability. Like its neighbors, China can only win more valuable business if it produces what Beijing’s leaders call “core technologies”—products the rest of the world can’t live without. Otherwise, China risks continuing the low-profit pattern of what has occurred with the iPhone. Millions of Chinese are involved in assembling the phones, but when the devices are sold to end users Apple makes most of the money, with much of the rest accruing to the makers of the chips inside each phone.

The question for China’s leaders was how to pivot to producing the kind of chips the world coveted. When Japan, Taiwan, and South Korea wanted to break into the complex and high-value portions of the chip industry, they poured capital into their semiconductor companies, organizing government investment but also pressing private banks to lend. Second, they tried to lure home their scientists and engineers who’d been trained at U.S. universities and worked in Silicon Valley. Third, they forged partnerships with foreign firms but required them to transfer technology or train local workers. Fourth, they played foreigners off each other, taking advantage of competition between Silicon Valley firms—and, later, between Americans and Japanese—to get the best deal for themselves. “We want to promote a semiconductor industry in Taiwan,” the island’s powerful minister,K. T. Li, had told Morris Chang while founding TSMC. Was it any surprise that Xi Jinping wanted one, too?

CHAPTER 43“Call Forth the Assault”

In January 2017, Xi took the stage at the World Economic Forum in the Swiss ski resort of Davos, three days before Donald Trump’s inauguration as U.S. president, to outline China’s economic vision. As Xi promised “win-win outcomes” via a “dynamic, innovation-driven growth model,” the audience of CEOs and billionaires applauded politely.“No one will emerge as a winner in a trade war,” the Chinese president declared, in a none-too-subtle dig at his incoming American counterpart. Three days later in Washington, Trump delivered a shockingly combative inaugural address, condemning “other countries making our products, stealing our companies and destroying our jobs.” Rather than embracing trade, Trump declared that“protection will lead to great prosperity and strength.”

Xi’s speech was the sort of claptrap that global leaders were supposed to say when addressing business tycoons. The media fawned over his supposed defense of economic openness and globalization against populist shocks like Trump and Brexit.“Xi sounding rather more presidential than US president-elect,” tweeted talking-head Ian Bremmer. “Xi Jinping Delivers aRobust Defence of Globalisation,” reported the lead headline in theFinancial Times.“World Leaders FindHope for Globalization in Davos Amid Populist Revolt,” theWashington Postdeclared.“The international community is looking to China,” explained Klaus Schwab, the chair of the World Economic Forum.

Months before his Davos debut, Xi had struck a different tone in a speech to Chinese tech titans and Communist Party leaders in Beijing for a conference on “cyber security and informatization.” To an audience that included Huawei founder Ren Zhengfei, Alibaba CEO Jack Ma, high-profile People’s Liberation Army (PLA) researchers, and most of China’s political elite, Xi exhorted China to focus on “gaining breakthroughs in core technology as quickly as possible.” Above all, “core technology” meant semiconductors. Xi didn’t call for a trade war, but his vision didn’t sound like trade peace, either. “We must promote strong alliances and attack strategic passes in a coordinated manner. We must assault the fortifications of core technology research and development…. We must not only call forth the assault, we must also sound the call for assembly, which means that we must concentrate the most powerful forces to act together, compose shock brigades and special forces tostorm the passes.” Donald Trump, it turned out, wasn’t the only world leader who mixed martial metaphors with economic policy. The chip industry faced an organized assault by the world’s second-largest economy and the one-party state that ruled it.

China’s leaders were counting on a mix of market and military methods to develop advanced chips at home. Though Xi had jailed his rivals and become China’s most powerful leader since Mao Zedong, his control over China was far from absolute. He could lock up dissidents and censor even the most veiled criticism online. But many facets of Xi’s economic agenda, from industrial restructuring to financial market reform, remained stillborn, obstructed by Communist Party bureaucrats and localgovernment officials who preferred the status quo. Officials often dragged their feet when faced with instructions from Beijing that they disliked.

Xi’s military rhetoric wasn’t solely a tactic for mobilizing lazy bureaucrats, however. With every year that passed, the precariousness of China’s technological position became clearer. China’s imports ofsemiconductors increased year after year. The chip industry was changing in ways that weren’t favorable to China.“The scale of investment has risen rapidly and market share has accelerated to the concentration of dominant firms,” China’s State Council noted in one technology policy report. These dominant firms—TSMC and Samsung chief among them—would be extremely difficult to displace. Yet demand for chips was “exploding,” China’s leaders realized, driven by “cloud computing, the Internet of Things, and big data.” These trends were dangerous: chips were becoming even more important, yet the design and production of the most advanced chips was monopolized by a handful of companies, all located outside of China.

China’s problem isn’t only in chip fabrication. In nearly every step of the process of producing semiconductors, China is staggeringly dependent on foreign technology, almost all of which is controlled by China’s geopolitical rivals—Taiwan, Japan, South Korea, or the United States. The software tools used to design chips are dominated by U.S. firms, while China has less than 1 percent of the global software tool market, according todata aggregated by scholars at Georgetown University’s Center for Security and Emerging Technology. When it comes to core intellectual property, the building blocks of transistor patterns from which many chips are designed, China’s market share is 2 percent; most of the rest is American or British. China supplies 4 percent of the world’s silicon wafers and other chipmaking materials; 1 percent of the tools used to fabricate chips; 5 percent of the market for chip designs. It has only a 7 percent market share in the business of fabricating chips. None of this fabrication capacity involves high-value, leading-edge technology.

Across the entire semiconductor supply chain, aggregating the impact of chip design, intellectual property, tools, fabrication, and other steps, Chinese firms have a 6 percent market share, compared to America’s 39 percent, South Korea’s 16 percent, or Taiwan’s 12 percent, according to the Georgetown researchers. Almost every chip produced in China can also be fabricated elsewhere. For advanced logic, memory,and analog chips, however, China is crucially dependent on American software and designs; American, Dutch, and Japanese machinery; and South Korean and Taiwanese manufacturing. It’s no wonder that Xi Jinping was worried.

As China’s tech firms pushed further into spheres like cloud computing, autonomous vehicles, and artificial intelligence, their demand for semiconductors was guaranteed to grow. The x86 server chips that remain the workhorse of modern data centers are still dominated by AMD and Intel. There’s no Chinese firm that produces a commercially competitive GPU,leaving China reliant on Nvidia and AMD for these chips, too. The more China becomes an AI superpower, as Beijing’s boosters promise and as China’s government hopes, the more the country’s reliance on foreign chips will increase, unless China finds a way to design and manufacture its own. Xi’s call to “compose shock brigades and special forces to storm the passes” seemed urgent. China’s government set out a plan called Made in China 2025, which envisioned reducing China’s imported share of its chip production from 85 percent in 2015 to30 percent by 2025.

Every Chinese leader since the founding of the People’s Republic wanted a semiconductor industry, of course. Mao’s Cultural Revolution dream that every worker could produce their own transistors had been an abject failure. Decades later, Chinese leaders recruited Richard Chang to found SMIC and “share God’s love with the Chinese.” He built a capable foundry, but it struggled to make money and suffered a series of bruising intellectual property lawsuits with TSMC. Eventually Chang was ousted andprivate-sector investors were displaced by the Chinese state. By 2015, a former official from China’s Ministry of Industry and Information was named chairman, solidifying the relationship between SMIC and the Chinese government. The firm continued to lag meaningfully behind TSMC in manufacturing prowess.

SMIC, meanwhile, was the comparative success story in China’s fabrication industry. Huahong and Grace, two other Chinese foundries, won little market share, in large part because the state-owned firmsand municipal governments that controlled them meddled incessantly in business decisions. One former CEO of a Chinese foundry explained that every governor wanted a chip fab in his province and offered a mix of subsidies and veiled threats to ensure a facility was built. So China’s foundries ended up with an inefficient collection ofsmall facilities spread across the country. Foreigners saw immense potential in the Chinese chip industry, but only if disastrous corporate governance and business processes could somehow be fixed. “When a Chinese firm said, ‘Let’s open a joint venture,’ ” one European semiconductor executive explained. “I heard,‘Let’s lose money.’ ” The joint ventures that did emerge were generally addicted to government subsidies and rarely produced meaningful new technology.

China’s subsidy strategy of the 2000s hadn’t created a leading-edge domestic chip industry. Yet doing nothing—and tolerating continued dependence on foreign semiconductors—wasn’t politically tolerable. So as early as 2014, Beijing had decided to double down on semiconductor subsidies, launching what became known as the “Big Fund” to back a new leap forward in chips.Key “investors” in the fund include China’s Ministry of Finance, the state-owned China Development Bank, and a variety of other government-owned firms, including China Tobacco and investment vehicles of the Beijing, Shanghai, and Wuhan municipal governments. Some analysts hailed this asa new “venture capital” model of state support, but the decision to force China’s state-owned cigarette company to fund integrated circuits was about as far from the operating model of Silicon Valley venture capital as could be.

Beijing was right to conclude the country’s chip industry needed more money. In 2014, when the fund was launched, advanced fabs cost well over $10 billion. SMIC reported revenue of just a couple billion dollars per year throughout the 2010s, less than a tenth of TSMC. It would be impossible to replicate TSMC’s investment plans with private-sector funding alone.Only a government could take such a gamble. The amount of money China’s put into chip subsidies and “investments” is hard to calculate, since much of the spending is doneby local governments and opaque state-owned banks, but it’s widely thought to measure in the tens of billions of dollars.

China was disadvantaged, however, by the government’s desire not to build connections with Silicon Valley, but to break free of it. Japan, South Korea, the Netherlands, and Taiwan had come to dominate important steps of the semiconductor production process by integrating deeply with the U.S. chip industry. Taiwan’s foundry industry only grew rich thanks to America’s fabless firms, while ASML’s most advanced lithography tools only work thanks to specialized light sources produced at the company’s San Diego subsidiary. Despite occasional tension over trade, these countries have similar interests and worldviews, so mutual reliance on each other for chip designs, tools, and fabrication services was seen as a reasonable price to pay for the efficiency of globalized production.

If China only wanted a bigger part in this ecosystem, its ambitions could’ve been accommodated. However, Beijing wasn’t looking for a better position in a system dominated by America and its friends. Xi’s call to “assault the fortifications” wasn’t a request for slightly higher market share. It was about remaking the world’s semiconductor industry, not integrating with it. Some economic policymakers and semiconductor industry executives in China would have preferred a strategy of deeper integration, yet leaders in Beijing, who thought more about security than efficiency, saw interdependence as a threat. The Made in China 2025 plan didn’t advocate economic integration but the opposite. It called for slashing China’s dependence on imported chips. The primary target of the Made in China 2025 plan is toreduce the share of foreign chips used in China.

This economic vision threatened to transform trade flows and the global economy. Since Fairchild Semiconductor’s first facility in Hong Kong, trade in chips had helped build globalization. The dollar values at stake in China’s vision of reworking semiconductor supply chains were staggering. China’s import of chips—$260 billion in 2017, the yearof Xi’s Davos debut—was far larger than Saudi Arabia’s export of oil or Germany’s export of cars. China spends more money buying chips each year than the entire global trade in aircraft. No product is more central to international trade than semiconductors.

It wasn’t only Silicon Valley’s profits that were at risk. If China’s drive for self-sufficiency in semiconductors succeeded, its neighbors, most of whom had export-dependent economies, would suffer even more. Integrated circuits made up 15 percent of South Korea’s exports in 2017; 17 percent of Singapore’s; 19 percent of Malaysia’s; 21 percent of the Philippines’; and 36 percent of Taiwan’s. Made in China 2025 called all this into question. At stake was the world’s most dense network of supply chains and trade flows, the electronics industries that had undergirded Asia’s economic growth and political stability over the past half century.

Made in China 2025 was just a plan, of course. Governments often have plans that fail abjectly. China’s track record in spurring production of cutting-edge chips was far from impressive. Yet the tools China could bring to bear—vast government subsidies, state-backed theft of trade secrets, and the ability to use access to the world’s second-largest consumer market to force foreign firms to follow its writ—gave Beijing unparalleled power to shape the future of the chip industry. If any country could pull off such an ambitious transformation of trade flows, it was China. Many countries in the region thought Beijing might succeed. Taiwan’s tech industry began worrying about what Taiwanese calledthe “red supply chain”—the mainland firms muscling into high-value electronics components Taiwan had previously dominated. It was easy to imagine semiconductors would be next.

Xi Jinping’s call for China’s government and its companies to “assault the fortifications of core technology research” reverberated around East Asia long before it made much impact in the West. Donald Trump’s proclamations about protectionism garnered millions of retweets, but Beijing had a plan, powerful tools, and a forty-year trackrecord of surprising the world with China’s economic and technological capabilities. This vision of semiconductor independence promised to upend globalization, transforming the production of one of the world’s most widely traded and most valuable goods. No one in the audience of Xi’s speech at Davos in 2017 noticed what was at stake behind the platitudes, but even a populist like Trump couldn’t have imagined a more radical reworking of the global economy.

CHAPTER 44Technology Transfer

“If you’re a country, as China is, of 1.3 billion people, you would want an IT industry,” IBM CEO Ginni Rometty told the audience at the 2015 China Development Forum, an annual event hosted by China’s government in Beijing. “I think some firms find that perhaps frightening. We, though, at IBM… find that to bea great opportunity.” Of all America’s tech firms, none had a closer relationship to the U.S. government than IBM. For nearly a century, the company had built advanced computer systems for America’s most sensitive national security applications. IBM staff had deep personal relationships with officials in the Pentagon and in U.S. intelligence agencies. When Edward Snowden stole and leaked documents about America’s foreign intelligence operations before fleeing to Moscow, it wasn’t a surprise to find IBM under suspicion forcollaborating with American cyber sleuths.

After the Snowden leaks, IBM’s sales in China slumped by 20 percent as Chinese firms turned elsewhere for servers and networking equipment. IBM’s CFO, Martin Schroeter, told investors that “China is going througha very significant economic set of reforms,” an eloquent way of explaining that the Chinese government was punishing IBM by restricting its sales. Rometty decided to offer Beijing an olive branch in the form of semiconductor technology. She made a series of visits to China in the years after 2014,meeting with top Chinese officials likePremier Li Keqiang, Beijing mayor Wang Anshun, and Vice Premier Ma Kai, who was personally in charge of China’s efforts to upgrade its chip industry. IBM told the media that Rometty’s visits to Beijing were intended “to emphasize the tech giant’s commitment to local partnerships, future cooperation, and information security,” asa report by the Reuters news agency put it. China’s state-run Xinhua news service was even more blunt about the quid pro quo, reporting that Rometty and Ma discussed“enhancing cooperation in integrated circuit” development.

In its drive for semiconductor self-sufficiency, one of Beijing’s focus areas was chips for servers. The mid-2010s were very much like today where the world’s data centers rely mostly on chips using the x86 instruction set architecture, though Nvidia’s GPUs were beginning to win market share. Only three companies had the necessary intellectual property to produce x86 chips: America’s Intel and AMD as well as a small Taiwanese company called Via. In practice, Intel dominated the market. IBM’s “Power” chip architecture had once played a major role in corporate servers but had lost out in the 2010s. Some researchers thought that Arm’s architecture—popular in mobile devices—might also play a role in future data centers, though at the time Arm-based chips hadlittle server market share. Whatever the architecture, China had virtually no domestic capability to produce competitive data center chips. China’s government set out to acquire this technology, strong-arming U.S. companies and pressuring them to transfer technology to Chinese partners.

Intel, which dominated sales of semiconductors for servers, had few incentives to cut deals with Beijing over data center processors (though it was separately doing deals with Chinese state-backed firms and local governments in the market for mobile chips and NAND memory chips, where Intel’s position was weaker). The American chipmakers that had lost data center market share to Intel, however, were looking for a competitive advantage. At IBM, Rometty announced a change of strategy that would appeal to Beijing. Rather than trying to sell chips and servers to Chinese customers, she announced, IBM would open itschip technology to Chinese partners, enabling them, she explained, to“create a new and vibrant ecosystem of Chinese companies producing homegrown computer systems for the local and international markets.” IBM’s decision to trade technology for market access made business sense. The firm’s technology was seen as second-rate, and without Beijing’s imprimatur it was unlikely to reverse its post-Snowden market shrinkage. IBM was simultaneously trying to shift its global business from selling hardware to selling services, so sharing access to its chip designs seemed logical.

For China’s government, however, this partnership wasn’t solely about business. One of the individuals working with IBM’s newly available chip technology was the former cyber security chief of China’s nuclear missile arsenal, Shen Changxiang, theNew York Timesreported. Just a year earlier, Shen had been warning of the“huge security risks” in working with U.S. firms. Now he appeared to have concluded that IBM’s offer to turn over chip technology supported Beijing’s semiconductor strategy and China’s national interests.

IBM wasn’t the only company willing to help Chinese firms develop data center chips. Around the same time, Qualcomm, the company specializing in chips for smartphones, was trying to break into the data center chip business using an Arm architecture. Simultaneously, Qualcomm was battling Chinese regulators who wanted it to slash the fees it charged Chinese firms that licensed its smartphone chip technology,a key source of Qualcomm’s revenue. As the biggest market for Qualcomm’s chips, China had enormous leverage over the company. So some industry analysts saw a connection when, shortly after settling the pricing dispute with Beijing, Qualcomm agreed to a joint venture with a Chinese company called Huaxintong to develop server chips.Huaxintong didn’t have a track record in advanced chip design, but it was based in Guizhou Province, then governed by an up-and-coming Chinese party official named Chen Min’er, industry analysts noted.

The Qualcomm-Huaxintong joint venture didn’t last long. It was closed in 2019 after producing little of value. But some of the expertisedeveloped appears to have transferred to other Chinese companies building Arm-based data center chips. For example, Huaxintong participated in a consortium to develop energy-efficient chips thatincluded Phytium, another Chinese firm building Arm-based chips. At least one chip design engineer appears to have left Huaxintong in 2019 towork for Phytium, which the U.S. later alleged had helped the Chinese military design advanced weapons systems like hypersonic missiles.

The most controversial example of technology transfer, however, was by Intel’s archrival, AMD. In the mid-2010s, the company was struggling financially, having lost PC and data center market share to Intel. AMD was never on the brink of bankruptcy, but it wasn’t far from it, either. The company was looking for cash to buy time as it brought new products to market. In 2013, it sold its corporate headquarters in Austin, Texas, to raise cash, for example. In 2016, it sold to a Chinese firm an 85 percent stake in its semiconductor assembly, testing, and packaging facilities in Penang, Malaysia, and Suzhou, China, for $371 million. AMD described these facilities as“world-class.”

That same year, AMD cut a deal with a consortium ofChinese firms and government bodies to license the production of modified x86 chips for the Chinese market. The deal, which was deeply controversial within the industry and in Washington, was structured in a way that didn’t require the approval of CFIUS, the U.S. government committee that reviews foreign purchases of American assets. AMD took the transaction to the relevant authorities in the Commerce Department, who don’t“know anything about microprocessors, or semiconductors, or China,” as one industry insider put it. Intel reportedly warned the government about the deal, implying that it harmed U.S. interests and that it would threaten Intel’s business. Yet the government lacked a straightforward way to stop it, so the deal was ultimately waved through, sparking anger in Congress and in the Pentagon.

Just as AMD finalized the deal, its new processor series, called “Zen,” began hitting the market, turning around the company’s fortunes, so AMDended up not depending on the money from its licensing deal.However, the joint venture had already been signed and the technology was transferred. TheWall Street Journalran multiple stories arguing that AMD had sold “crown jewels” and “the keys to the kingdom.” Other industry analysts suggested the transaction was designed to let Chinese firms claim to the Chinese government they were designing cutting-edge microprocessors in China, when in reality they weresimply tweaking AMD designs. The transaction was portrayed in English-language media as a minor licensing deal, but leading Chinese experts told state-owned media the deal supported China’s effort to domesticate “core technologies” so that “we no longer can be pulled around by our noses.” Pentagon officials who opposed the deal agree that AMD scrupulously followed the letter of the law, but say they remain unconvinced the transaction was as innocuous as defenders claim. “I continue to be very skeptical we were getting the full story from AMD,” one former Pentagon official says.TheWall Street Journalreported that the joint venture involved Sugon, a Chinese supercomputer firm that has described “making contributions to China’s national defense and security” as its “fundamental mission.” AMD described Sugon as a “strategic partner” in press releases as recently as 2017, which was guaranteed toraise eyebrows in Washington.

What’s clear is that Sugon wanted help to build some of the world’s leading supercomputers, which are commonly used for developing“nuclear weapons and hypersonic weapons,” as Commerce Secretary Gina Raimondo explained in 2021. Sugon itself hasadvertised its links to the Chinese military, according to Elsa Kania, a leading American expert on the Chinese military. Even after the Trump administration decided to blacklist Sugon, severing the relationship with AMD, chip industry analyst Anton Shilov found Sugon circuit boards with AMD chips that it shouldn’t have been able to buy. AMD told journalists it had not provided technical support for the device in question andwasn’t sure how Sugon acquired the chips.

The Chinese market was so enticing that companies found it nearly impossible to avoid transferring technology. Some companies wereeven induced to transfer control of their entire China subsidiaries. In 2018, Arm, the British company that designs the chip architecture, spun out its China division, selling 51 percent of Arm China to a group of investors, while retaining the other 49 percent itself. Two years earlier, Arm had been purchased by Softbank, a Japanese company that has invested billions in Chinese tech startups. Softbank was therefore dependent on favorable Chinese regulatory treatment for the success of its investments. It faced scrutiny from U.S. regulators, who worried that its exposure to China made itvulnerable to political pressure from Beijing. Softbank had purchased Arm in 2016 for $40 billion, but it sold a 51 percent stake in the China division—which according to Softbank accounted for a fifth of Arm’s global sales—foronly $775 million.

What was the logic of spinning off Arm China? There’s no hard evidence that Softbank faced pressure from Chinese officials to sell the company’s Chinese subsidiary. Arm executives were open, however, in describing the logic. “If somebody was building [a system on a chip] for China military or China surveillance,”one Arm executive toldNikkei Asia, “China wants to have it only inside China. With this kind of new joint venture, this company can develop that. In the past this is something we couldn’t do.” “China wants to be secure and controllable,” this executive continued. “Ultimately they want to have control of their technology…. If it’s based on the technology that we bring, we could benefit from that,” he explained. Neither the Japanese officials who regulate Softbank, the UK officials who regulate Arm, nor the American officials with jurisdiction over a substantial portion of Arm’s intellectual property chose to investigate the implications.

Chip firms simply can’t ignore the world’s largest market for semiconductors. Chipmakers jealously guard their critical technologies, of course. But almost every chip firm has non-core technology, in subsectors that they don’t lead, that they’d be happy to share for a price. When companies are losing market share or in need of financing, moreover, they don’t have the luxury of focusing on the long term. This gives China powerful levers to induce foreign chip firms to transfer technology,open production facilities, or license intellectual property, even when foreign companies realize they’re helping develop competitors. For chip firms, its often easier to raise funds in China than on Wall Street. Accepting Chinese capital can be an implicit requirement for doing business in the country.

Viewed on their own terms, the deals that IBM, AMD, and Arm struck in China were driven by reasonable business logic. Collectively, they risk technology leakage. U.S. and UK chip architectures and designs as well as Taiwanese foundries have played a central role in the development of China’s supercomputer programs. Compared to a decade ago, though its capabilities still meaningfully lag the cutting edge, China is substantially less reliant on foreigners to design and produce chips needed in data centers. IBM CEO Ginni Rometty was right to sense “great opportunity” in technology transfer agreements with China. She was only wrong in thinking her firm would be the beneficiary.

CHAPTER 45“Mergers Are Bound to Happen”

For Zhao Weiguo, it was a long, winding road from a childhood raising pigs and sheep along China’s western frontier to beingcelebrated as a chip billionaire by Chinese media. Zhao ended up in rural China after his father was banished for writing subversive poems during the Cultural Revolution, but he never planned to accept a life rearing livestock in the countryside. He won entrance to Tsinghua University, one of the best in China, and pursued a degree in electrical engineering. Tsinghua had led China’s semiconductor efforts since the industry’s earliest days in China, but it isn’t clear how much expertise in transistors and capacitors Zhao developed as a student. He worked at a tech firm after finishing his bachelor’s degree, then pivoted toward investing as a vice president of Tsinghua Unigroup. This company was established by his alma mater to turn the university’s scientific research into profitable businesses, but it appears to have invested heavily in real estate. Zhao built a reputation as a corporate dealmaker and set himself ona path toward a billion-dollar fortune.

In 2004, Zhao launched his own investment fund, Beijing Jiankun Group, investing in real estate, mining, and other sectors where high-level political connections are usually crucial to success. Rich financialreturns followed, with Zhao reportedly turning 1 million yuan of initial invested capital into 4.5 billion. In 2009, Zhao used this wealth to buy a 49 percent stake in his former employer, Tsinghua Unigroup. The university continued to own the other 51 percent of shares. It was a bizarre transaction: a private real-estate investment firm now owned nearly half of a company that was supposed to be monetizing technologies produced by China’s premier research university. But Tsinghua Unigroup was never simply a “normal” company. The son of former Chinese president Hu Jintao—said to be a“personal friend” of Zhao’s—served as Communist Party secretary for the holding company that owned Unigroup. The president of Tsinghua University throughout the 2000s, meanwhile, was acollege roommate of Xi Jinping.

In 2013, four years after buying his stake in Tsinghua Unigroup, and just before China’s Communist Party announced new plans to provide vast subsidies to the country’s semiconductor firms, Zhao decided it was time to invest in the chip industry. He denies that Tsinghua Unigroup’s semiconductor strategy was a response to the government’s wishes. “Everyone thinks that the government is pushing the development of the chip sector, but it’s not like that,” he toldForbesin 2015. Instead, he takes credit for attracting Beijing’s attention to the sector. “Companies did some stuff first and then the government started to notice….All our deals are market oriented.”

“Market oriented” is not how most analysts would describe Zhao’s strategy. Rather than investing in the best chip firms, he tried buying anything on the market. His explanation of Tsinghua’s investment strategy didn’t suggest nuance or sophistication. “If you carry your gun up the mountain, you just don’t know if there’s game there,” he was quoted as saying.“Maybe you’ll catch a deer, maybe a goat, you just don’t know.” Nevertheless, he was a confident hunter. The world’s chip firms were his prey.

Even given his fortune, which was estimated at $2 billion,the sums Zhao spent building his chip empire were shocking. In 2013, Tsinghua Unigroup started its shopping spree at home, spending several billiondollars buying two of China’s most successful fabless chip design companies, Spreadtrum Communications and RDA Microelectronics, which made low-end chips for smartphones. Zhao declared the merger would produce“enormous synergies in China and abroad,” though nearly a decade on there’s little evidence any synergies have materialized.

A year later, in 2014,Zhao cut a deal with Intel to couple Intel’s wireless modem chips with Tsinghua Unigroup’s smartphone processors. Intel hoped the tie-up would boost its sales in China’s smartphone market, while Zhao wanted his companies to learn from Intel’s chip design expertise. He was open about Tsinghua Unigroup’s goals: semiconductors were China’s“national priority,” he said. Working with Intel would “accelerate the technology development and further strengthen the competitiveness and market position of Chinese semiconductor companies.”

Zhao’s partnership with Intel had some business logic behind it, but many other decisions didn’t appear driven by a desire to make a profit. For example, Tsinghua Unigroup offered to fund XMC (later acquired by YMTC), a Chinese firm trying to break into the NAND memory chip market. The company’s CEO admitted at one public event that he initially asked for $15 billion to build a new fab but was told totake $24 billion instead, “on the basis that if they were going to be serious about being a world leader then they needed to match the world leaders’ investment.” Even the goatherders Zhao grew up alongside in western China would have recognized he was handing out multibillion-dollar checks with reckless abandon. When it later emerged that in addition to semiconductors, Tsinghua Unigroup was also investing inreal estate and online gambling, it was barely a surprise.

China’s state-backed “Big Fund,” meanwhile,announced plans to invest an initial tranche of over $1 billion in Tsinghua Unigroup. This provided a stamp of government approval for the company’s strategy. Zhao turned his efforts overseas. It wasn’t enough to own China’s fabless companies or attract foreign firms to invest in China. He wanted to control the commanding heights of the world’s chip industry. Hehired several leading Taiwanese semiconductor executives, including the former CEO of UMC, Taiwan’s second biggest foundry. In 2015, Zhao visited Taiwan himself and pressed the island to lift its restrictions on Chinese investment in sectors like chip design and fabrication. He bought a 25 percent stake in Taiwan’s Powertech Technology, which assembles and tests semiconductors, a transaction that was allowed under Taiwan’s rules. Hepursued stakes and joint ventures with several of Taiwan’s other large chip assemblers.

However, Zhao’s real interest was inbuying the island’s crown jewels—MediaTek, the leading chip designer outside the U.S., and TSMC, the foundry on which almost all the world’s fabless chip firms rely. He floated the idea of buying a 25 percent stake in TSMC and advocated merging MediaTek with Tsinghua Unigroup’s chip design businesses. Neither transaction was legal under Taiwan’s existing foreign investment rules, but when Zhao returned from Taiwan he took the stage at a public conference in Beijing andsuggested China should ban imports of Taiwanese chips if Taipei didn’t change these restrictions.

This pressure campaign put TSMC and MediaTek in a bind. Both companies were crucially reliant on the Chinese market. Most of the chips TSMC produced were assembled into electronics goods in workshops across China. The idea of selling Taiwan’s technological crown jewels to a state-backed investor on the mainland made little sense. The island would end up dependent on Beijing. Besides abolishing its military or welcoming occupation by the People’s Liberation Army, it was hard to think of a step that would do more to undermine Taiwan’s autonomy.

Both TSMC and MediaTek issued statements vaguely expressing openness to Chinese investment. Morris Chang said his only stipulations were“if the price is right and if it is beneficial to shareholders”—hardly the response one would expect about a deal that threatened to undermine Taiwan’s economic independence. But Chang also warned that if Chinese investors could appoint members to Taiwanese companies’ boards of directors,“it will not be that easy to protect intellectualproperty.” MediaTek said it was supportive of efforts “tojoin hands and raise the status and competitiveness of the Chinese and Taiwanese enterprises in the global chip industry”—but only if the Taiwanese government allowed. In Taipei, the government seemed to be wobbling, however. John Deng, the island’s economy minister, suggested relaxing Taiwan’s restrictions on Chinese investment in the chip sector. Amid Chinese pressure, he signaled that greater Chinese control of Taiwan’s chip sector was inevitable.“You cannot escape from this issue,” Deng told journalists. But amid a contentious presidential election in Taiwan, the government delayed any policy changes.

Soon Zhao set his sights on America’s semiconductor industry. In July 2015, Tsinghua Unigroupfloated the idea of buying Micron, the American memory chip producer, for $23 billion, which would have been the largest ever Chinese purchase of a U.S. company in any industry. Unlike in the case of Taiwan’s tech titans and its economic technocrats, Tsinghua’s efforts to purchase Micron were firmly rebuffed. Micron said it didn’t think the transaction was realistic giventhe U.S. government’s security concerns. Soon after, in September 2015, Tsinghua Unigroup tried again,extending a $3.7 billion offer for a 15 percent stake in another U.S. company that made NAND memory chips. CFIUS, the U.S. government body that assesses foreign investment, rejected this on security grounds.

Then, in spring 2016, Tsinghua quietly bought 6 percent of the shares in Lattice Semiconductor, another U.S. chip firm.“This is purely a financial investment,” Zhao told theWall Street Journal. “We don’t have any intention at all to try to acquire Lattice.” Scarcelyweeks after the investment was publicized, Tsinghua Unigroup began to sell its shares in Lattice. Shortly thereafter, Lattice received a buyout offer from a California-based investment firm called Canyon Bridge, which journalists from Reuters revealed had beendiscreetly funded by the Chinese government. The U.S. government firmly rejected the deal.

The same investment fundsimultaneously bought Imagination, a UK-based chip designer in financial distress. The transaction wascarefully structured to exclude Imagination’s U.S. assetsso that Washington didn’t block it, too. British regulators waved the deal through, only to find themselves regretting the decision when, three years later, the new owners tried torestructure the board of directors with officials appointed by a Chinese government investment fund.

The problem wasn’t simply that Chinese government-linked funds were buying up foreign chip firms. They were doing so in ways that violated laws about market manipulation andinsider trading. While Canyon Bridge was maneuvering to purchase Lattice Semiconductor, for example, one of Canyon Bridge’s cofounders tipped off a colleague in Beijing, passing along details about the transaction via WeChat and at meetings in a Starbucks in Beijing. His colleague bought stock based on this knowledge; the Canyon Bridge executive was convicted of insider trading.

For his part, Zhao saw himself as simply a committed entrepreneur. “Mergers between big U.S. and Chinese companies arebound to happen,” he declared. “They should be viewed from a business perspective instead of being treated under nationalist or political contexts.” But Tsinghua Unigroup’s activities were impossible to comprehend from the perspective of business logic. There were too many Chinese state-owned and state-financed “private equity” firms circling the world’s semiconductor companies to describe this as anything other than a government-led effort to seize foreign chip firms. “Call forth the assault,” Xi Jinping had demanded. Zhao, Tsinghua Unigroup, and other government-backed “investment” vehicles were simply following these publicly announced instructions. Amid this frenzied dealmaking, Tsinghua Unigroup announced in 2017 that it hadreceived new “investment”: around $15 billion from the China Development Bank and $7 billion from the Integrated Circuit Industry Investment Fund—both owned and controlled by the Chinese state.

CHAPTER 46The Rise of Huawei

When Ren Zhengfei gives media interviews in the headquarters of Huawei, the Chinese technology company he founded, his crisply tailored jacket and slacks, unbuttoned collar, and vivacious smile make him seem just like any Silicon Valley executive. In some ways he is. His company’s telecom equipment—the radios on cell towers that transmit calls, pictures, and emails to and from smartphones—forms the backbone of the world’s mobile internet. Huawei’s smartphone unit, meanwhile, was until recently one of the world’s largest, rivaling Apple and Samsung in numbers of phones sold. The company provides other types of tech infrastructure, too, from undersea fiber-optic cables to cloud computing. In many countries it’s impossible to use a phone without using some of Huawei’s equipment—as difficult as it is to use a PC without Microsoft products or to surf the internet (outside of China) without Google. However, Huawei is different from the world’s other big tech companies in one major way: its two-decade-long struggle with America’s national security state.

Reading American newspaper headlines about Huawei’s role in Chinese government spying, it would be easy to conclude that the company emerged as an appendage of China’s security agencies. Theties between Huawei and the Chinese state are well documented but explain little about how the company built a globe-spanning business.To understand the company’s expansion, it’s more helpful to compare Huawei’s trajectory to a different tech-focused conglomerate, South Korea’s Samsung. Ren was born a generation after Samsung’s Lee Byung-Chul, but the two moguls have a similar operating model. Lee built Samsung from a trader of dried fish into a tech company churning out some of the world’s most advanced processor and memory chips by relying on three strategies. First, assiduously cultivate political relationships to garner favorable regulation and cheap capital. Second, identify products pioneered in the West and Japan and learn to build them at equivalent quality and lower cost. Third, globalize relentlessly, not only to seek new customers but also to learn by competing with the world’s best companies. Executing these strategies made Samsung one of the world’s biggest companies, achieving revenues equivalent to 10 percent of South Korea’s entire GDP.

Could a Chinese firm execute a similar set of strategies? Most of China’s tech firms tried a different approach with a less global focus. For all the country’s export prowess, China’s internet firms make almost all their money inside of China’s domestic market, where they’re protected by regulation and censorship. Tencent, Alibaba, Pinduoduo, and Meituan would be minnows were it not for their home market dominance. When Chinese tech firms have gone abroad, they’ve often struggled to compete.

By contrast, Huawei has embraced foreign competition from its earliest days. Ren Zhengfei’s business model has been fundamentally different from Alibaba’s or Tencent’s. He’s taken concepts pioneered abroad, produced quality versions at lower cost, and sold them to the world, grabbing international market share from international rivals. This business model made Samsung’s founders rich and put the company at the center of the world’s tech ecosystem. Until very recently, Huawei seemed to be on the same path.

The company’s international orientation was visible from its founding in 1987. Ren had grown up in a family of high school teachers in rural Guizhou Province in southern China. He’d trained as an engineerin Sichuan’s capital of Chongqing before serving in the Chinese army, where he says he worked in a factory producingsynthetic fiber for garments. After reportedly leaving the army (some skeptics wonder about the circumstances, and if he actually did cut ties with the military completely), he moved to Shenzhen, then a small town just across the border from Hong Kong. At the time, Hong Kong was still ruled by the British, a small outpost of prosperity along the otherwise impoverished South China coast. China’s leaders had begun implementing economic reforms about a decade earlier, experimenting with letting individuals form private companies as a means of spurring economic growth. Shenzhen was one of several cities selected as a “special economic zone,” where restrictive laws were canceled and foreign investment was encouraged. The city boomed as Hong Kong money flowed in and as China’s would-be entrepreneurs flocked to the city in search of freedom from regulation.

Ren saw an opportunity to import telecom switches, the equipment that connects one caller to another. With $5,000 in startup capital, he began importing this gear from Hong Kong. When his partners across the border realized he was making good money by reselling their equipment, they cut him off, so Ren decided to build his own equipment. By the early 1990s, Huawei had several hundred people working in R&D, largely focused onbuilding switching equipment. Since those days, the telecom infrastructure has merged with digital infrastructure. The same cell towers that transmit calls also send other types of data. So Huawei’s equipment now plays an important—and in many countries, crucial—role in transmitting the world’s data. Today it is one of the world’s three biggest providers of equipment on cell towers, alongside Finland’s Nokia and Sweden’s Ericsson.

Huawei’s critics often allege that its success rests on a foundation of stolen intellectual property, though this is only partly true. The company has admitted to some prior intellectual property violations and has been accused of far more. In 2003, for example, Huawei acknowledged that 2 percent of the code in one of its routers wascopied directly from Cisco, anAmerican competitor. Canadian newspapers, meanwhile, have reported thatthe country’s spy agencies believe there was a Chinese-government-backed campaign of hacking and espionage against Canadian telecom giant Nortel in the 2000s, which allegedly benefitted Huawei.

Theft of intellectual property may well have benefitted the company, but it can’t explain its success. No quantity of intellectual property or trade secrets is enough to build a business as big as Huawei. The company has developed efficient manufacturing processes that have driven down costs and built products that customers see as high-quality. Huawei’s spending on R&D, meanwhile, is world leading. The company spends several times more on R&D than other Chinese tech firms. Its roughly$15 billion annual R&D budget is paralleled by only a handful of firms, including tech companies like Google and Amazon, pharmaceutical companies like Merck, and carmakers like Daimler or Volkswagen. Even when weighing Huawei’s track record of intellectual property theft, the company’s multibillion-dollar R&D spending suggests a fundamentally different ethos than the “copy it” mentality of Soviet Zelenograd, or the many other Chinese firms that have tried to break into the chip industry on the cheap.

Huawei executives say they invest in R&D because they’ve learned from Silicon Valley. Ren reportedly brought a group of Huawei executives totour the U.S. in 1997, visiting companies like HP, IBM, and Bell Labs. They left convinced of the importance not only of R&D, but also of effective management processes. Starting in 1999, Huawei hired IBM’s consulting arm to teach it to operate like a world-class company. One former IBM consultant said Huawei spent $50 million in 1999 on consulting fees, at a time when its entire revenue was less than a billion dollars. At one point it employed one hundred IBM staff to redo business processes. “They weren’t too daunted by the engineering tasks,” this former consultant reported, but“they felt they were a hundred years behind when it came to economic knowledge and business knowledge.” Thanks to IBM and other Western consultants, Huawei learned to manage its supply chain, anticipate customer demand, develop top-class marketing, and sell products worldwide.

Huawei coupled this with a militaristic ethos that the company celebrates as “wolf-culture.” Calligraphy on the wall of one of the company’s research lab reads“Sacrifice is a soldier’s highest cause. Victory is a soldier’s greatest contribution,” according to aNew York Timesreport. In the context of the chip industry, though, Ren Zhengfei’s militarism wasn’t that unique. Andy Grove wrote a bestseller about the benefits of paranoia. Morris Chang, meanwhile, said that he’dstudied Stalingrad, the bloodiest battle of World War II, for lessons about business.

In addition to Western consulting firms, Huawei had help from another powerful institution: China’s government. At different points in its development, Huawei has benefitted from support from the local government in Shenzhen, from state-owned banks, and from the central government in Beijing. AWall Street Journalreview of total subsidies provided by the Chinese government reached a figure of$75 billion, in the form of subsidized land, state-backed credit, and tax deductions at a scale far above what most Western companies get from their governments, though the benefits provided to Huawei might not be too different from what other East Asian governments provide to priority companies.

The scale of state support for an ostensibly private firm has raised red flags, especially in the United States. China’s leaders have certainly been supportive of the company’s global expansion. Even in the mid-1990s, when Huawei was still a small company,top Chinese officials like Vice Premier Wu Bangguo visited the company and promised to support it. Vice Premier Wu also traveled abroad with Ren Zhengfei to help Huawei sell telecom equipment in Africa. Yet it’s hard to distinguish whether this amounted to special support for Huawei or was simply standard operating procedure given China’s mercantilist approach to international trade and the fuzzy boundaries between public and private property.

The lack of clarity about Ren’s transition from the People’s Liberation Army to Huawei remains puzzling. The company’s complex and opaque ownership structure has also provoked reasonable questions.Huawei executive Ken Hu’s argument to a U.S. congressional inquiry that Ren Zhengfei’s membership in the Chinese Communist Party was just like how “some American businessmen areDemocrat or Republican,” sounded to U.S. analysts like willful obfuscation of the Communist Party’s role in the company’s governance. Nevertheless, the thesis that Huawei was purpose built by the Chinese state has never had strong evidence behind it.

Huawei’s rise has, however, worked in the interests of the Chinese state, as the company grabbed market share and embedded its equipment in the world’s telecom networks. For many years, despite the warning of America’s spy agencies, Huawei spread rapidly across the world. As it grew, incumbent Western firms selling telecom equipment were forced to merge or pushed out of the market. Canada’s Nortel went bankrupt. Alcatel-Lucent, the company that inherited Bell Labs after AT&T was broken up, sold its operations to Finland’s Nokia.

Huawei’s ambitions only grew. Having provided the infrastructure that makes phone calls possible, it started selling phones, too. Soon its smartphones were among the world’s best sellers. By 2019 the company lagged only Samsung measured by number of units sold. Huawei still made substantially less money per phone than either Samsung or Apple, the latter of which had the marketing and the ecosystem to charge vastly higher prices. However, Huawei’s ability to enter the smartphone market and quickly seize a leading position put Apple and Samsung on notice.

Moreover, Huawei was making progress designing some of the critical chips in its own phones. Company insiders say the firm’s chip design ambitions accelerated in March 2011, when an earthquake off Japan’s east coast caused a tsunami that slammed into the country. The world’s attention focused on the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactor that was damaged by the flooding, but inside Huawei, executives worried about the threat to the company’s supply chain. Like every major producer of electronics, Huawei relied on Japanese providers for crucial components in their telecom gear and smartphones and feared the disastermight cause immense delays. In the end, Huawei got lucky. Few of its component suppliers saw production knocked out for long. However, the company asked its consultants to determine its supply chain risk. They reported that the company had two key vulnerabilities: access to Google’s Android operating system, the core software on which all non-Apple smartphones run, and the supply of the semiconductors that every smartphone requires.

The company identified the 250 most important semiconductors that its products required and begandesigning as many as possible in-house. These chips were largely related to the business of building telecom base stations but also included the application processors for the company’s smartphones, semiconductors that were monstrously complex and required the most advanced chipmaking technology. Like Apple and most other leading chip firms, Huawei chose to outsource fabrication of these chips, because it needed to use manufacturing processes that, at most, a couple companies could provide. Taiwan’s TSMC was the natural place to turn.

By the end of the 2010s, Huawei’s HiSilicon unit was designing some of the world’s most complex chips for smartphones and had becomeTSMC’s second-largest customer. Huawei’s phones still required chips from other companies, too, like memory chips or various types of signal processors. But mastering the production of cell phone processors was an impressive feat. America’s near monopoly on the world’s most profitable chip design businesses was under threat. This was more evidence that Huawei was successfully replicating what South Korea’s Samsung or Japan’s Sony had done decades earlier: learning to produce advanced technology, winning global markets, investing in R&D, and challenging America’s tech leaders. Moreover, Huawei seemed uniquely well placed for a new era of ubiquitous computing that would accompany the rollout of the next generation of telecom infrastructure: 5G.

CHAPTER 47The 5G Future

When Ren Zhengfei started importing telephone switches from Hong Kong, network gear couldn’t do much beyond connecting one phone to another. In the early days of telephones, switching had been done by hand, with rows of women seated in front of a wall of plugs, connecting them in different combinations depending on who was calling. By the 1980s, humans had been replaced by electronic switches, which often relied on semiconductor devices. Even still, it tookswitching gear the size of a closet to manage a single building’s worth of telephone lines. Today, telecom providers are more reliant than ever on silicon, but a closet’s worth of gear can process calls, texts, and video, now often sent via radio networks rather than landlines.

Huawei has mastered the latest generation of equipment to send calls and data via cell networks, called 5G. Yet 5G isn’t really about phones—it’s about the future of computing, and therefore, it’s about semiconductors. The “G” in 5G stands for generation. We’ve already cycled through four generations of mobile networking standards, each of which required new hardware on phones and in cell towers. Just as Moore’s Law has let us pack more transistors onto chips, there’s been a steady increase in the number of 1s and 0s flying to and from cell phones via radio waves. 2G phones could send picture texts; 3G phonesopened websites; and 4G made it possible to stream video from almost anywhere. 5G will provide a similar leap forward.

Most people today take their smartphone for granted, but it’s only thanks to ever more powerful semiconductors that we no longer marvel at picture texts and are instead frustrated with split-second delays in video streaming. The modem chips that manage a phone’s connection with cell networks make it possible to send many more 1s and 0s in the radio waves via a phone’s antenna.

There’s been a comparable change in the chips hidden inside a cell network and atop cell towers. Sending 1s and 0s through the air while minimizing dropped calls or delays to video streaming is staggeringly complicated. The amount of space available in the relevant part of the radio-wave spectrum is limited. There are only so many radio-wave frequencies, many of which aren’t optimal for sending lots of data or transmitting over long distances. Telecom firms have therefore relied on semiconductors to pack ever more data into existing spectrum space. “Spectrum is far more expensive than silicon,” explains Dave Robertson, a chip expert at Analog Devices, which specializes in semiconductors that manage radio transmission. Semiconductors have therefore been fundamental to the ability to send more data wirelessly. Chip designers like Qualcomm found new ways to optimize transmission of data via the radio spectrum, and chipmakers like Analog Devices have made semiconductors called radio frequency transceivers that can send and receive radio waves withmore precision while using less power.

The next generation of network technology, 5G, will make possible the wireless transmission of even more data. Partly, this will be via even more intricate methods of sharing spectrum space, which require more complex algorithms and more computing power on phones and in cell towers so that 1s and 0s can be slotted in even the tiniest free space in the wireless spectrum. Partly, 5G networks will send more data by using a new, empty radio frequency spectrum that was previously considered impractical to fill. Advanced semiconductors make it possible not only to pack more 1s and 0s into a given frequency of radio waves, butalso to send radio waves farther and target them with unprecedented accuracy. Cell networks will identify a phone’s location and send radio waves directly toward a phone, using a technique called beamforming. A typical radio wave, like one that sends music to your car radio, sends signals out in every direction because it doesn’t know where your car is. This wastes power and creates more waves and more interference. With beamforming, a cell tower identifies a device’s location and sends the signal it needs only in that direction. Result: less interference and stronger signals for everyone.

Faster networks capable of carrying more data won’t simply let existing phones run faster—they’ll change the way we think about mobile computing. In the age of 1G networks, cell phones were too expensive for most people to own. With 2G networks, we came to assume that phones could send text messages as well as voice. Today, we expect phones and tablets to have almost all the features of PCs. As it becomes possible to send even more data over cell networks, we’ll connect ever more devices to the cell network. The more devices we have, the more data they’ll produce, which will require more processing power to make sense of.

The promise of connecting many more devices to cell networks and harvesting data from them may not sound revolutionary. You may not think a 5G network can brew better coffee, but it won’t be long until your coffeemaker is collecting and processing data on the temperature and quality of each cup it produces. There are innumerable ways in business and industry that more data and more connectivity will produce better service and lower cost, from optimizing how tractors drive across fields to coordinating robots on assembly lines. Medical devices and sensors will track and diagnose more conditions. The world has far more sensory information than our current ability to digitize, communicate, and process.

There’s no better case study showing how connectivity and computing power will turn old products into digitized machines than Tesla, Elon Musk’s auto company. Tesla’s cult following and soaring stock price have attracted plenty of attention, but what’s less noticed is that Teslais also a leading chip designer. The company hired star semiconductor designers like Jim Keller to build a chip specialized for its automated driving needs, which is fabricated using leading-edge technology. As early as 2014, some analysts were noting that Tesla cars “resemble a smartphone.” The company has been often compared to Apple, which also designs its own semiconductors. Like Apple’s products, Tesla’s finely tuned user experience and its seemingly effortless integration of advanced computing into a twentieth-century product—a car—are only possible because of custom-designed chips. Cars have incorporated simple chips since the 1970s. However, the spread of electric vehicles, which require specialized semiconductors to manage the power supply, coupled with increased demand for autonomous driving features foretells that the number and cost of chips in a typical car will increase substantially.

Cars are only the most prominent example of how the ability to send and receive more data will create more demand for computing power—in devices on the “edge” of the network, in the cell network itself, and in vast data centers. Around 2017, as telecom companies around the world began signing contracts with equipment providers to build 5G networks, it emerged that China’s Huawei was in a leading position, offering gear that was perceived by the industry to behigh-quality and competitively priced. Huawei looked likely to play a bigger role in the construction of 5G networks than any other company, overtaking Sweden’s Ericcson and Finland’s Nokia, the only other main producers of the equipment on cell towers.

Inside Huawei’s equipment on cell towers, like that of its rivals, is a large quantity of silicon.One study of Huawei’s radio units, by the Japanese newspaperNikkei Asia, found a heavy reliance on U.S.-made chips, like field-programmable gate arrays from Lattice Semiconductor, the Oregon company that Tsinghua Unigroup had bought and then sold a minority stake in several years earlier. Texas Instruments, Analog Devices, Broadcom, and Cypress Semiconductor also designed and built chips that Huawei’s radio gear relied on. According to this analysis,American chips and other components constitute nearly 30 percent of the cost of each Huawei system. However, the main processor chip was designed domestically by Huawei’s HiSilicon chip design arm and fabricated at TSMC. Huawei hadn’t reached technological self-sufficiency. It relied on multiple foreign chip firms to produce specialized semiconductors and on TSMC to fabricate the chips it designed in-house. Yet Huawei produced some of the most complex electronics in each radio system and understood the details of how to integrate all the components.

With Huawei’s design arm proving itself world-class, it wasn’t hard to imagine a future in which Chinese chip design firms were as important customers of TSMC as Silicon Valley giants. If the trends of the late 2010s were projected forward, by 2030 China’s chip industry might rival Silicon Valley for influence. This wouldn’t simply disrupt tech firms and trade flows. It would also reset the balance of military power.

CHAPTER 48The Next Offset

From swarms of autonomous drones to invisible battles in cyberspace and across the electromagnetic spectrum, the future of war will be defined by computing power. The U.S. military is no longer the unchallenged leader. Long gone are the days when the U.S. had unrivaled access to the world’s seas and airspace, guaranteed by precision missiles and all-seeing sensors. The shock waves that reverberated around the world’s defense ministries after the 1991 Persian Gulf War—and the fear that the surgical strikes that had defanged Saddam’s army could be used against any military in the world—was felt in Beijing like a“psychological nuclear attack,” according to one account. In the thirty years since that conflict, China has poured funds into high-tech weaponry, abandoning Mao-era doctrines of waging a low-tech People’s War and embracing the idea that the fights of the future will rely on advanced sensors, communications, and computing. Now China is developing the computing infrastructure an advanced fighting force requires.

Beijing’s aim isn’t simply to match the U.S. system-by-system, but to develop capabilities that could “offset” American advantages, taking the Pentagon’s concept from the 1970s and turning it against the United States. China has fielded an array of weapons that systematically undermine U.S. advantages. China’s precision anti-ship missiles make it extremely dangerous for U.S. surface ships to transitthe Taiwan Strait in a time of war, holding American naval power at bay. New air defense systems contest America’s ability to dominate the airspace in a conflict. Long-range land attack missiles threaten the network of American military bases from Japan to Guam. China’s anti-satellite weapons threaten to disable communications and GPS networks. China’s cyberwar capabilities haven’t been tested in wartime, but the Chinese would try to bring down entire U.S. military systems. Meanwhile, in the electromagnetic spectrum, China might try to jam American communications and blind surveillance systems, leaving the U.S. military unable to see enemies or communicate with allies.

Undergirding all these capabilities is a belief in Chinese military circles that warfare is not simply becoming “informationized” but “intelligentized”—inelegant military jargon that means applying artificial intelligence to weapons systems. Of course, computing power has been central to warfare for the past half century, though the quantity of 1s and 0s that can be harnessed to support military systems is millions of times larger than decades earlier. What’s new today is that America now has a credible challenger. The Soviet Union could match the U.S. missile-for-missile but not byte-for-byte. China thinks it can do both. The fate of China’s semiconductor industry isn’t simply a question of commerce. Whichever country can produce more 1s and 0s will have a serious military advantage, too.

What factors will define this computing race? In 2021, a group of American tech and foreign policy grandees chaired by former Google CEO Eric Schmidt released a report predicting that“China could surpass the United States as the world’s AI superpower.” Chinese leaders appear to agree. As China military expert Elsa Kania notes, the PLA has been talking about “AI weapons” for at least a decade, referring to systems that use “AI to pursue, distinguish, and destroy enemy targets automatically.” Xi Jinping himself has urged the PLA to “accelerate the development of military intelligentization” as a defense priority.

The idea of military AI evokes images of killer robots, but there are many spheres where applying machine learning can make militarysystems better. Predictive maintenance—learning when machines need to be fixed—is already helping keep planes in the sky and ships at sea. AI-enabled submarine sonars or satellite imagery can identify threats more accurately. New weapons systems can be designed more quickly. Bombs and missiles can be aimed more accurately, especially when it comes to moving targets. Autonomous vehicles in the air, underwater, and on land are already learning to maneuver, identify adversaries, and destroy them. Not all of this is as revolutionary as phrases like “AI weapons” might imply. We’ve had self-guided, fire-and-forget missiles for decades, for example. But as weapons get smarter and more autonomous, their demands for computing power only grow.

It isn’t guaranteed that China will win the race to develop and deploy systems empowered by artificial intelligence, in part because this “race” isn’t about a single technology but about complex systems. The Cold War arms race, it’s worth remembering, wasn’t won by the first country to shoot a satellite into space. Yet China’s capabilities when it comes to AI systems are undeniably impressive. Georgetown University’s Ben Buchanan has noted thata “triad” of data, algorithms, and computing power are needed to harness AI. With the exception of computing power, China’s capabilities may already equal the United States’.

When it comes to accessing the type of data that can be fed into AI algorithms, neither China nor the U.S. has a clear advantage. Beijing’s boosters argue the country’s surveillance state and its massive population let it collect more data, though the ability to amass data about China’s populace probably doesn’t help much in the military sphere. No amount of data about online shopping habits or the facial structure of all of China’s 1.3 billion citizens will train a computer to recognize the sounds of a submarine lurking in the Taiwan Strait, for example.China doesn’t have any built-in advantages in gathering data relevant to military systems.

It’s harder to say whether one side has an advantage when it comes to devising clever algorithms. Measured by the number of AI experts, China appears to have capabilities that are comparable to America’s.Researchers at MacroPolo, a China-focused think tank, found that 29 percent of the world’s leading researchers in artificial intelligence are from China, as opposed to 20 percent from the U.S. and 18 percent from Europe. However, a staggering share of these experts end up working in the U.S., which employs59 percent of the world’s top AI researchers. The combination of new visa and travel restrictions plus China’s effort to retain more researchers at home may neutralize America’s historical skill at stripping geopolitical rivals of their smartest minds.

In the third part of Buchanan’s “triad,” computing power, the United States still has a substantial lead, though it has eroded significantly in recent years. China is still staggeringly dependent on foreign semiconductor technology—in particular, U.S.-designed, Taiwan-fabricated processors—to undertake complex computation. It isn’t only Chinese smartphones and PCs that rely on foreign chips. So, too, do most Chinese data centers—which explains why the country has tried so hard to acquire technology from companies like IBM and AMD. One Chinese study has estimated that as many as95 percent of GPUs in Chinese servers running artificial intelligence workloads are designed by Nvidia, for example. Chips from Intel, Xilinx, AMD, and others are crucially important in Chinese data centers. Even under the most optimistic projections, it will be half a decade before China can design competitive chips and the software ecosystem around them, and far longer before it can manufacture these chips domestically.

For many Chinese military systems, however, acquiring U.S.-designed, Taiwan-fabricated chips hasn’t been difficult. A recent review of 343 publicly available AI-related People’s Liberation Army procurement contracts, byresearchers at Georgetown University, found that less than 20 percent of the contracts involved companies that are subject to U.S. export controls. In other words, the Chinese military has had little difficulty simply buying cutting-edge U.S. chips off-the-shelf and plugging them into military systems. The Georgetown researchers found that Chinese military suppliers even advertise on their websites their use of American chips. The Chinese government’s controversial policy of“Civil Military Fusion,” an effort to apply advanced civilian technology to military systems, looks like it’s working. Absent a major change in U.S. export restrictions, the People’s Liberation Army will acquire much of the computing power it needs by simply buying it from Silicon Valley.

Of course, the People’s Liberation Army isn’t the only military trying to apply advanced computing to weapons systems. As the fighting power of China’s military has grown, the Pentagon has realized it needs a new strategy. In the mid-2010s, officials like Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel began speaking about a need for a new “offset,” evoking the effort of Bill Perry, Harold Brown, and Andrew Marshall during the 1970s to overcome the USSR’s quantitative advantage. The U.S. faces the same basic dilemma today: China can deploy more ships and planes than the U.S., especially in theaters that matter, like the Taiwan Strait. “We will never try to match our opponents or our competitors tank for tank, plane for plane, person for person,” declared Bob Work, the former deputy defense secretary who is the intellectual godfather of this new offset, in a clear echo of the logic of the late 1970s. The U.S. military will only succeed, in other words, if it hasa decisive technological advantage.

What will this technological advantage look like? The 1970s offset was driven by “digital microprocessors, information technologies, new sensors, stealth,” Work has argued. This time, it will be “advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and autonomy.” The U.S. military is already fielding the first generation of new autonomous vehicles, like Saildrone, an unmanned windsurfer that can spend months roving the oceans while tracking submarines or intercepting adversaries’ communications. These devices cost a tiny fraction of a typical Navy ship, letting the military field many of them and providing platforms for sensors and communications across the world’s oceans. Autonomous surface ships, planes, and submarines are also being developed and deployed. These autonomous platforms will require artificial intelligence to guide them and make decisions. The more computing power that can be put on board, the smarter decisions they’ll make.

DARPA developed the technology that made the 1970s offset possible; now it’s devising systems that promise new computing-enabled transformations in warfare. DARPA leaders envision“computers distributed across the battlespace that can all communicate and coordinate with one another,” from the largest naval ship to the tiniest drone. The challenge isn’t simply to embed computing power in a single device, like a guided missile, but to network thousands of devices across a battlefield, letting them share data and putting machines in a position to make more decisions. DARPA has funded research programs on “human-machine teaming,” envisioning, for example, a piloted fighter jet flying alongside several autonomous drones that are an additional set of eyes and ears for the human pilot.

Just as the Cold War was decided by electrons zipping around the guidance computers of American missiles, the fights of the future may be decided in the electromagnetic spectrum. The more the world’s militaries rely on electronic sensors and communication, the more they’ll have to battle for access to the spectrum space needed to send messages or to detect and track adversaries. We’ve only had a glimpse of what wartime electromagnetic spectrum operations will look like. For example, Russia has used a variety of radar and signals jammers in its war against Ukraine.The Russian government also reportedly obstructs GPS signals around President Vladimir Putin’s official travel, perhaps as a security measure. Not coincidentally, DARPA is researchingalternative navigation systems that aren’t reliant on GPS signals or satellites, to enable American missiles to hit their targets even if GPS systems are down.

The battle for the electromagnetic spectrum will be an invisible struggle conducted by semiconductors. Radar, jamming, and communications are all managed by complex radio frequency chips and digital-analog converters, which modulate signals to take advantage of open spectrum space, send signals in a specific direction, and try to confuse adversaries’ sensors. Simultaneously, powerful digital chips will run complex algorithms inside a radar or jammer that assess the 289signals received and decide what signals to send out in a matter of milliseconds. At stake isa military’s ability to see and to communicate. Autonomous drones won’t be worth much if the devices can’t determine where they are or where they’re heading.

The warfare of the future will be more reliant than ever on chips—powerful processors to run AI algorithms, big memory chips to crunch data, perfectly tuned analog chips to sense and produce radio waves. In 2017, DARPA launched a new project called theElectronics Resurgence Initiative to help build the next wave of militarily relevant chip technology. In some ways, DARPA’s renewed interest in chips stems naturally from its history. It funded pioneering scholars like Caltech’s Carver Mead and catalyzed research into chip design software, new lithography techniques, andtransistor structures.

Yet DARPA and the U.S. government have found it harder than ever to shape the future of the chip industry. DARPA’s budget is a couple billion dollars per year, less than the R&D budgets of most of the industry’s biggest firms. Of course, DARPA spends a lot more on far-out research ideas, whereas companies like Intel and Qualcomm spend most of their money on projects that are only a couple years from fruition. However, the U.S. government in general buys a smaller share of the world’s chips than ever before. The U.S. government bought almost all the early integrated circuits that Fairchild and Texas Instruments produced in the early 1960s. By the 1970s, that number had fallen to10−15 percent. Now it’s around 2 percent of the U.S. chip market. As a buyer of chips, Apple CEO Tim Cook has more influence on the industry than any Pentagon official today.

Making semiconductors is so expensive that even the Pentagon can’t afford to do it in-house. The National Security Agency used to have a chip fab at its headquarters in Maryland’s Fort Meade. In the 2000s, however, the government decided it was too expensive to keep upgrading per the cadence dictated by Moore’s Law. Today evendesigninga leading-edge chip—which can costseveral hundred million dollars—is too expensive for all but the most important projects.

Both the U.S. military and the government’s spy agencies outsource the production of their chips to “trusted foundries.” This is relatively straightforward for many types of analog or radio frequency chips, where the U.S. has world-class capabilities. When it comes to logic chips, though, this poses a dilemma. Intel’s production capabilities are just behind the leading edge, though the company mostly produces chips for its own PC and server businesses. TSMC and Samsung, meanwhile, keep their most cutting-edge fabrication capabilities in Taiwan and South Korea. And a large share of chip assembly and packaging also takes place in Asia. As the Defense Department tries to use more off-the-shelf components to reduce cost, it will buy even more devices from abroad.

The military worries that chips fabricated or assembled abroad are more susceptible to tampering, with back doors added or errors written in. However, even chips designed and produced domestically can have unintended vulnerabilities. In 2018, researchers discovered two fundamental errors in Intel’s widely used microprocessor architecture calledSpectre and Meltdown, which enabled the copying of data such as passwords—a huge security flaw. According to theWall Street Journal, Intel first disclosed the flaw to customers, including Chinese tech companies,before notifying the U.S. government, a fact that only intensified Pentagon officials’ concern about their declining influence over the chip industry.

DARPA is investing in technology that can guarantee chips are tamper-free or to verify they’re manufactured exactly as intended. Long gone are the days when the military could count on firms like TI to design, manufacture, and assemble cutting-edge analog and digital electronics all onshore. Today there’s simply no way to avoid buying some things from abroad—and buying many from Taiwan. So DARPA’s betting on technology to enable a“zero trust” approach to microelectronics: trust nothing and verify everything, via technologies like tiny sensors implanted on a chip that can detect efforts to modify it.

All these efforts to use microelectronics to spur a new “offset” and reestablish a decisive military advantage over China and Russia,however, assume the U.S. will keep its lead in chips. That’s now looking like a risky bet. The era of the “run faster” strategy saw the U.S. fall behind in certain segments of the chipmaking process, most notably in the growing dependence on Taiwan for building advanced logic chips. Intel, which for three decades had been America’s chip champion, has now very clearly stumbled. Many people in the industry think it has fallen decisively behind. Meanwhile, China is pouring billions of dollars into its chip industry while pressuring foreign companies to turn over sensitive technology. For every major chip firm, the Chinese consumer market is far more important a customer than the U.S. government.

Beijing’s efforts to acquire advanced technology, the deep interconnections between the U.S. and Chinese electronics industries, and the two countries’ mutual reliance on fabrication in Taiwan all raise questions. America was already running slower. It’snow betting the future of its military on a technology over which its dominance is slipping. “This idea of pulling ahead with an offset,” argues Matt Turpin, an official who worked on the issue at the Pentagon, “is nearly impossible if the Chinese arein the car with us.”

“Call forth the assault,” Xi Jinping declared. China’s leaders have identified their reliance on foreign chipmakers as a critical vulnerability. They’ve set out a plan to rework the world’s chip industry by buying foreign chipmakers, stealing their technology, and providing billions of dollars of subsidies to Chinese chip firms. The People’s Liberation Army is now counting on these efforts to help it evade U.S. restrictions, though it can still buy legally many U.S. chips in its pursuit of “military intelligentization.” For its part, the Pentagon has launched its own offset, after admitting that China’s military modernization has closed the gap between the two superpowers’ militaries, especially in the contested waters off China’s coast. Taiwan isn’t simply the source of the advanced chips that both countries’ militaries are betting on. It’s also the most likely future battleground.