CHAPTER 15“That Competition Is Tough”

“Ever since you’ve written that paper,my life has been hell!” one chip salesman grumbled to Richard Anderson, a Hewlett-Packard executive tasked with deciding which chips met HP’s stringent standards. The 1980s were a hellish decade for the entire U.S. semiconductor sector. Silicon Valley thought it sat atop the world’s tech industry, but after two decades of rapid growth it now faced an existential crisis: cutthroat competition from Japan. When Anderson took the stage at an industry conference at Washington, D.C.’s historic Mayflower Hotel on March 25, 1980, the audience listened carefully, because everyone was trying to sell him their chips. Hewlett-Packard, the company he worked for, had invented the concept of a Silicon Valley startup in the 1930s, when Stanford grads Dave Packard and Bill Hewlett began tinkering with electronic equipment in a Palo Alto garage. Now it was one of America’s biggest tech companies—and one of the largest buyers of semiconductors.

Anderson’s judgment about a chip could shape the fate of any semiconductor company, but Silicon Valley’s salesmen were never allowed to wine and dine him. “Sometimes I let them take me out to lunch,” he admitted sheepishly. But the entire valley knew that he was the gatekeeper to almost everyone’s most important customer. His job gave him a panoramic view of the semiconductor industry, including how each company was performing.

In addition to American companies like Intel and TI, Japanese firms like Toshiba and NEC were now building DRAM memory chips—though most people in Silicon Valley didn’t take these players seriously. U.S. chipmakers were run by the people who’d invented high-tech. They joked that Japan was the country of“click, click”—the sound made by cameras that Japanese engineers brought to chip conferences to better copy the ideas. The fact that major American chipmakers were embroiled in intellectual property lawsuits with Japanese rivals was interpreted as evidence that Silicon Valley was still well ahead.

At HP, however, Anderson didn’t simply take Toshiba and NEC seriously—he tested their chips and found that they were of far better quality than American competitors. None of the three Japanese firms reported failure rates above 0.02 percent during their first one thousand hours of use, he reported. The lowest failure rate of the three American firms was 0.09 percent—which meant four-and-a-half times as many U.S.-made chips were malfunctioning. The worst U.S. firm produced chips with 0.26 percent failure rates—overtentimes as bad as the Japanese results. American DRAM chips worked the same, cost the same, but malfunctioned far more often. So why should anyone buy them?

Chips weren’t the only U.S. industry facing pressure from high-quality, ultra-efficient Japanese competitors. In the immediate postwar years, “Made in Japan” had been a synonym for “cheap.” But entrepreneurs like Sony’s Akio Morita had cast off this reputation for low price, replacing it with products that were as high quality as those of any American competitor. Morita’s transistor radios were the first prominent challenger to American economic preeminence, and their success emboldened Morita and his Japanese peers to set their sights even higher. American industries from cars to steel were facing intense Japanese competition.

By the 1980s, consumer electronics had become a Japanese specialty, with Sony leading the way in launching new consumer goods, grabbing market share from American rivals. At first Japanese firms succeeded by replicating U.S. rivals’ products, manufacturing them at higher qualityand lower price. Some Japanese played up the idea that they excelled at implementation, whereas America was better at innovation. “We have no Dr. Noyces or Dr. Shockleys,” one Japanese journalist wrote, though the country had begun to accumulate its share of Nobel Prize winners. Yet prominent Japanese continued to downplay their country’s scientific successes, especially when speaking to American audiences. Sony’s research director, the famed physicist Makoto Kikuchi, told an American journalist that Japan had fewer geniuses than America, a country with “outstanding elites.” But America also had “a long tail” of people “with less than normal intelligence,” Kikuchi argued, explaining why Japan was better at mass manufacturing.

American chipmakers clung to their belief that Kikuchi was right about America’s innovation advantage, even though contradictory data was piling up. The best evidence against the thesis that Japan was an “implementer” rather than an “innovator” was Kikuchi’s boss, Sony CEO Akio Morita. Morita knew that replication was a recipe for second-class status and second-rate profits. He drove his engineers not only to build the best radios and TVs, but to imagine new types of products entirely.

In 1979, just months before Anderson’s presentation about quality problems in American chips, Sony introduced the Walkman, a portable music player that revolutionized the music industry, incorporatingfive of the company’s cutting-edge integrated circuits in each device. Now teenagers the world over could carry their favorite music in their pockets, powered by integrated circuits that had been pioneered in Silicon Valley but developed in Japan. Sony sold385 million units worldwide, making the Walkman one of the most popular consumer devices in history. This was innovation at its purest, and it had been made in Japan.

The U.S. had supported Japan’s postwar transformation into a transistor salesman. U.S. occupation authorities transferred knowledge about the invention of the transistor to Japanese physicists, while policymakers in Washington ensured Japanese firms like Sony could easily sell into U.S. markets. The aim of turning Japan into a country ofdemocratic capitalists had worked. Now some Americans were asking whether it had worked too well. The strategy of empowering Japanese businesses seemed to be undermining America’s economic and technological edge.

Charlie Sporck, the executive who’d been burned in effigy while managing a GE production line, found Japan’s productivity fascinating and frightening. After starting in the chip industry at Fairchild, Sporck left to run National Semiconductor, then a large producer of memory chips. Ultra-efficient Japanese competition seemed certain to put him out of business. Sporck had a hard-earned reputation for his ability to squeeze efficiency out of assembly line workers, but Japan’s productivity levels were far ahead of anything his workers could accomplish.

Sporck sent one of his foremen and a group of assembly line workers to spend several months in Japan touring semiconductor facilities. When they returned to California, Sporck made a film about their experience. They reported that Japanese workers were “amazingly pro-company” and that “the foreman put a priority to the company over his family.” Bosses in Japan didn’t have to worry about getting burned in effigy. It was a “beautiful story,” Sporck declared. “It was something for all of our employees to see howthat competition is tough.”

CHAPTER 16“At War with Japan”

“Idon’t want to pretend I’m in a fair fight,” complained Jerry Sanders, CEO of Advanced Micro Devices. “I’m not.” Sanders knew something about fights. At age eighteen, he’d almost died after a brawl on Chicago’s South Side, where he grew up. After his body was found in a garbage can, a priest administered last rites, though he miraculously emerged from a coma three days later. He eventually landed a job in sales and marketing at Fairchild Semiconductor, working alongside Noyce, Moore, and Andy Grove before they left Fairchild to found Intel. Though his colleagues were mostly modest engineers, Sanders flashed expensive watches and drove a Rolls-Royce. He commuted weekly to Silicon Valley from Southern California, where he lived, because, one colleague recalled, he and his wife only really felt at home in Bel Air. After founding his own chip firm, AMD, in 1969, he spent much of the next three decades in a legal brawl with Intel over intellectual property disputes. “I can’t walk away from a fight,” he admitted to a journalist.

“The chip industry was an incredibly competitive industry,” remembered Charlie Sporck, the executive who’d led the offshoring of chip assembly throughout Asia.“Knock ’em down, fight ’em, kill ’em,” Sporck explained, hitting his fists together to illustrate his point. With pride, patents, and millions of dollars at stake, the brawls between U.S.chipmakers often got personal, but there was still plenty of growth to go around. Japanese competition seemed different, however. If Hitachi, Fujitsu, Toshiba, and NEC succeeded, Sporck thought, they’d move the whole industry across the Pacific. “I worked specifically on TVs at GE,” Sporck warned. “You can drive by that facility now, it’s still empty…. We knew the dangers and we damn right well weren’t gonna let that happen to us.” Everything was at stake—jobs, fortunes, legacies, pride. “We’re at war with Japan,” Sporck insisted. “Not with guns and ammunition, butan economic war with technology, productivity, and quality.”

Sporck saw Silicon Valley’s internal battles as fair fights, but thought Japan’s DRAM firms benefitted from intellectual property theft, protected markets, government subsidies, and cheap capital. Sporck had a point about the spies. After a 5 a.m. rendezvous in the lobby of a Hartford, Connecticut, hotel on a cold November morning in 1981, Hitachi employee Jun Naruse handed over an envelope of cash and received in exchange a badge from a “consultant” at a company called Glenmar that promised to help Hitachi obtain industrial secrets. With the badge, Naruse gained entrance to a secret facility run by aircraft maker Pratt & Whitney and photographed the company’s newest computer.

After the photo shoot, Naruse’s colleague on the West Coast, Kenji Hayashi, sent a letter to Glenmar proposing a “consultation service contract.”Hitachi’s senior executives authorized half a million dollars in payments to Glenmar to continue the relationship. But Glenmar was a front company; its employees were FBI agents. “It seems that Hitachi stepped into the trap,” the company’s spokesman sheepishly admitted, after Hitachi’s employees were arrested and the story made the front page of the business section of theNew York Times.

Hitachi wasn’t alone. Mitsubishi Electric faced similar charges. It wasn’t only in semiconductors and computers that accusations of Japanese espionage and double-dealing swirled. Toshiba, the Japanese industrial conglomerate that by the mid-1980s was a world-leading DRAM producer, spent years fighting claims—true, it turned out—thatthe company sold the Soviets machinery that helped them buildquieter submarines. There was no direct link between Toshiba’s Soviet submarine deal and the company’s semiconductor business, but many Americans saw the submarine case as further evidence of Japanesedirty dealing. The number of documented cases of illegal Japanese industrial espionage was low. But was this a sign that stealing secrets played only a small role in Japan’s success, or evidence that Japanese firms were skilled at spycraft?

Sneaking into rivals’ facilities was illegal but keeping tabs on competitors was normal practice in Silicon Valley. So, too, was accusing rivals of pilfering employees, ideas, and intellectual property. America’s chipmakers were constantly suing each other, after all. It took a decade of litigation between Fairchild and Texas Instruments to resolve the question of whether Noyce or Kilby had invented the integrated circuit, for example. Chip firms regularly poached rivals’ star engineers, too, hoping not only to acquire experienced workers but also knowledge about their competitors’ production processes. Noyce and Moore had left Shockley Semiconductor to found Fairchild, then left Fairchild to found Intel, where they hired dozens of Fairchild employees, including Andy Grove. Fairchild considered suing before deciding that it was unlikely to win a lawsuit against the geniuses who had built the chip industry. Tracking and emulating rivals was key to Silicon Valley’s business model. Was Japan’s strategy any different?

Sporck and Sanders pointed out that Japanese firms benefitted from a protected domestic market, too. Japanese firms could sell to the U.S., but Silicon Valley struggled to win market share in Japan. Until 1974, Japan imposed quotas limiting the number of chips U.S. firms could sell there. Even after these quotas were lifted, Japanese companies still bought few chips from Silicon Valley, even though Japan consumed a quarter of the world’s semiconductors, which companies like Sony plugged into TVs and VCRs that were sold worldwide. Some big Japanese chip consumers such as NTT, Japan’s national telecom monopoly, bought almost exclusively from Japanese suppliers. This wasostensibly a business decision, but NTT was government-owned, so politics likely played a role. Silicon Valley’slow market share in Japan cost American companies billions of dollars in sales.

Japan’s government subsidized its chipmakers, too. Unlike in the U.S., where antitrust law discouraged chip firms from collaborating, the Japanese government pushed companies to work together, launching a research consortium called the VLSI Program in 1976 with the government funding aroundhalf the budget. America’s chipmakers cited this as evidence of unfair Japanese competition, though the $72 million the VLSI Program spent annually on R&D was about the same as Texas Instruments’ R&D budget, and less than Motorola’s. Moreover, the U.S. government was itself deeply involved in supporting semiconductors, though Washington’s funding took the form of grants from DARPA, the Pentagon unit that invests in speculative technologies and has played a crucial role in funding chipmaking innovation.

Jerry Sanders saw Silicon Valley’s biggest disadvantage as its high cost of capital. The Japanese “pay 6 percent, maybe 7 percent, for capital. I pay18 percent on a good day,” he complained. Building advanced manufacturing facilities was brutally expensive, so the cost of credit was hugely important. A next-generation chip emerged roughly once every two years, requiring new facilities and new machinery. In the 1980s, U.S. interest rates reached 21.5 percent as the Federal Reserve sought to fight inflation.

By contrast, Japanese DRAM firms got access to far cheaper capital. Chipmakers like Hitachi and Mitsubishi were part of vast conglomerates with close links to banks that provided large, long-term loans. Even when Japanese companies were unprofitable, their banks kept them afloat by extending credit long after American lenders would havedriven them to bankruptcy. Japanese society was structurally geared to produce massive savings, because its postwar baby boom and rapid shift to one-child households created a glut of middle-aged families focused on saving for retirement. Japan’s skimpy social safetynet provided a further incentive for saving. Meanwhile, tight restrictions on stock markets and other investments left people with little choice but to stuff savings in bank accounts. As a result, banks were flush with deposits, extending loans at low rates because they had so much cash on hand. Japanese companies had more debt than American peers but neverthelesspaid lower rates to borrow.

With this cheap capital, Japanese firms launched a relentless struggle for market share. Toshiba, Fujitsu, and others were just as ruthless in competing with each other, despite the cooperative image painted by some American analysts. Yet with practically unlimited bank loans available, they could sustain losses as they waited for competitors to go bankrupt. In the early 1980s, Japanese firms invested 60 percent more than their U.S. rivals in production equipment, even though everyone in the industry faced the same cutthroat competition, with hardly anyone making much profit. Japanese chipmakers kept investing and producing, grabbing more and more market share. Because of this, five years after the 64K DRAM chip was introduced, Intel—the company that had pioneered DRAM chips a decade earlier—was left with only1.7 percent of the global DRAM market, while Japanese competitors’ market share soared.

Japan’s firms doubled down on DRAM production as Silicon Valley was pushed out. In 1984, Hitachi spent 80 billion yen on capital expenditure for its semiconductor business, compared to 1.5 billion a decade earlier. At Toshiba, spending grew from 3 billion to 75 billion; at NEC, from 3.5 billion to 110 billion. In 1985, Japanese firms spent 46 percent of the world’s capital expenditure on semiconductors, compared to America’s 35 percent. By 1990, the figures were even more lopsided, with Japanese firms accounting for half the world’s investment in chipmaking facilities and equipment. Japan’s CEOs kept building new facilities so long as their banks werehappy to foot the bill.

The Japanese chipmakers argued that none of this was unfair. America’s semiconductor firms got plenty of help from the government, especially via defense contracts. Anyway, American consumers of chips, likeHP, had hard evidence that Japanese chips were simply better quality. So Japan’s market share in DRAM chips grew every year during the 1980s, at the expense of American rivals. Japan’s semiconductor surge seemed unstoppable, no matter the apocalyptic predictions of American chipmakers. Soon all of Silicon Valley would be left for dead, like teenage Jerry Sanders in a South Side garbage can.

CHAPTER 17“Shipping Junk”

As the Japanese juggernaut tore through America’s high-tech industry, it wasn’t only companies producing DRAM chips that struggled. Many of their suppliers did, too. In 1981, GCA Corporation was being celebrated as one of America’s“hottest high-technology corporations,” growing rapidly by selling equipment that made possible Moore’s Law. In the two decades since physicist Jay Lathrop had first turned his microscope upside down to shine light on photoresist chemicals and “print” patterns on semiconductor wafers, the process of photolithography had become vastly more complicated. Long gone were the days ofBob Noyce driving up and down California’s Highway 101 in his old jalopy in search of movie camera lenses for Fairchild’s makeshift photolithography equipment. Now lithography was big business, and at the start of the 1980s, GCA was at the top.

Though photolithography had become far more precise than in the days of Jay Lathrop’s upside-down microscope, the principles remained the same. A light shined through masks and lenses, projecting focused shapes onto a silicon wafer covered with photoresist chemicals. Where light struck, the chemicals reacted with the light, allowing them to be washed away, exposing microscopic indentations on top of the silicon wafer. New materials were added in these holes, building circuits on the silicon. Specialized chemicals etched away the photoresist, leavingbehind perfectly formed shapes. It often took five, ten, or twenty iterations of lithography, deposition, etching, and polishing to fabricate an integrated circuit, with the result layered like a geometric wedding cake. As transistors were miniaturized, each part of the lithography process—from the chemicals to the lenses to the lasers that perfectly aligned the silicon wafers with the light source—became even more difficult.

The world’s leading lens makers were Germany’s Carl Zeiss and Japan’s Nikon, though the U.S. had a few specialized lens makers, too. Perkin Elmer, a small manufacturer in Norwalk, Connecticut, had made bombsights for the U.S. military during World War II and lenses for Cold War satellites and spy planes. The company realized this technology could be used in semiconductor lithography and developed a chip scanner that could align a silicon wafer and a lithographic light source with almost perfect precision, which was crucial if the light was to hit the silicon exactly as intended. The machine moved the light across the wafer like a copy machine, exposing the photoresist-covered wafer as if it were being painted with lines of light.Perkin Elmer’s scanner could create chips with features approaching one micron—a millionth of a meter—in width.

Perkin Elmer’s scanner dominated the lithography market in the late 1970s, but by the 1980s, it had been displaced by GCA, a company led by an Air Force officer–turned-geophysicist named Milt Greenberg, an ambitious, stubborn, foul-mouthed genius. Greenberg and an Air Force buddy founded GCA after World War II with seed capital from the Rockefellers. Trained as a military meteorologist, Greenberg had parlayed his knowledge of the atmosphere and his Air Force connections into work as a defense contractor, producing devices like high-altitude balloons that made measurements and tookphotographs of the Soviet Union.

Greenberg’s ambitions soon flew even higher. The growth in the semiconductor industry showed that the real money was in the mass market, not in specialized military contracts. Greenberg thought his company’shigh-tech optical systems—useful for military reconnaissance—could be deployed on civilian chips. At an industry conference in the late 1970s, where GCA was advertising its systems for chipmakers, Texas Instruments’Morris Chang walked up to the GCA booth, started looking at the company’s equipment, and inquired whether, rather than scanning light across the length of a wafer, the firm’s equipment could move step-by-step, exposing each chip on the silicon wafer. Such a “stepper” would be far more accurate than the existing scanners. Though a stepper had never been devised, GCA’s engineers believed they could create one, providing higher-resolution imaging and thus smaller transistors.

Several years later, in 1978,GCA introduced its first stepper. Sales orders began rolling in. Before the stepper, GCA had never made more than $50 million a year in revenue on its military contracts, but now it had a monopoly on an extraordinarily valuable machine. Revenue soon hit $300 million and the company’sstock price surged.

As Japan’s chip industry rose, however, GCA began to lose its edge. Greenberg, the CEO, imagined himself as a business titan, but he spent less time running the business and more hobnobbing with politicians. He broke ground on a major new manufacturing facility, betting that the early 1980s semiconductor boom would continue indefinitely. Costs spun out of control. Inventory was wildly mismanaged. One employee stumbled onto a million dollars’ worth of precision lenses sitting forgotten in a closet. Stories circulated of executives buying Corvettes on company credit cards. One of Greenberg’s founding partners admitted that the company was spending money like a“drunken sailor.”

The firm’s excesses were poorly timed. The semiconductor industry had always been ferociously cyclical, with the industry skyrocketing upward when demand was strong, and slumping back when it was not. It didn’t take a rocket scientist—and GCA had a handful on staff—to figure out that after the boom of the early 1980s, a downturn would eventually follow. Greenberg chose not to listen. “He didn’t want to hear from the marketing department that ‘there’s going to be a downturn,’ ” one employee remembered. So the company entered the mid-1980ssemiconductor slump heavily overextended. Global sales of lithography equipment fell by 40 percent between 1984 and 1986. GCA’s revenue fell by over two-thirds. “If we had a competent economist on staff, we might have predicted it,” one employee remembered. “But we didn’t.We had Milt.”

Just as the market slumped, GCA lost its position as the only company building steppers. Japan’s Nikon had initially been a partner of GCA, providing the precision lenses for its stepper. But Greenberg had decided to cut Nikon out, buying his own lens maker, New York−based Tropel, which made lenses for the U2 spy planes but which struggled to produce the number of high-quality lenses GCA needed. Meanwhile, GCA’s customer service atrophied. The company’s attitude, one analyst recounted, was “buy what we build and don’t bother us.” The company’s own employees admitted that“customers got fed up.” This was the attitude of a monopolist—but GCA was no longer a monopoly. After Greenberg stopped buying Nikon lenses, the Japanese company decided to make its own stepper. It acquired a machine from GCA and reverse engineered it. Soon Nikon had more market share than GCA.

Many Americans blamed Japan’s industrial subsidies for GCA’s loss of lithography leadership. It was true that Japan’s VLSI program, which boosted the country’s producers of DRAM chips, also helped equipment suppliers like Nikon. As U.S. and Japanese firms traded accusations of unfair government help, commercial relations grew stormy. But GCA employees admitted that, though their technology was world class, the company struggled with mass production. Precision manufacturing was essential, since lithography was now so exact that athunderstorm rolling through could change air pressure—and thus the angle at which light refracted—enough to distort the images carved on chips. Building hundreds of steppers a year required a laser focus on manufacturing and quality control. But GCA’s leaders were focused elsewhere.

It was popular to interpret the decline of GCA as an allegory about Japan’s rise and America’s fall. Some analysts saw evidence of a broadermanufacturing decay that started in steel, then afflicted cars, and was now spreading to high-tech industries. In 1987, Nobel Prize−winning MIT economist Robert Solow, who pioneered the study of productivity and economic growth, argued that the chip industry suffered from an “unstable structure,” with employees job hopping between firms and companies declining to invest in their workers. Prominent economist Robert Reich lamented the“paper entrepreneurialism” in Silicon Valley, which he thought focused too much on the search for prestige and affluence rather than technical advances. At American universities, he declared, “science and engineering programs are foundering.”

American chipmakers’ DRAM disaster was somewhat related to GCA’s collapsing market share. The Japanese DRAM firms that were outcompeting Silicon Valley preferred to buy from Japanese toolmakers, benefitting Nikon at the expense of GCA. However, most of GCA’s problems were homegrown, driven by unreliable equipment and bad customer service. Academics devised elaborate theories to explain how Japan’s huge conglomerates were better at manufacturing than America’s small startups. But the mundane reality was that GCA didn’t listen to its customers, while Nikon did. Chip firms that interacted with GCA found it“arrogant” and “not responsive.” No one said that about its Japanese rivals.

By the mid-1980s, therefore, Nikon’s systems were far better than GCA’s—even when the skies were sunny. Nikon’s machines produced meaningfully better yields and broke down far less often. Before IBM transitioned to Nikon steppers, it hoped each machine it used would work seventy-five hours before needing downtime for adjustments or repairs, for example. Nikon’s customers averagedten times that duration of continuous use.

Greenberg, GCA’s CEO, could never figure out how to fix the company. Up to the day he was ousted, he didn’t realize just how many of his company’s problems were internal. As he flew around the world on sales visits, drinking a Bloody Mary in first class, customers thought the firm was “shipping junk.” Employees complained that Greenbergwas in hock to Wall Street, focused as much on the stock price as on the business model. To make end-of-year numbers, the company would collude with customers, shipping an empty crate with a user’s manual in December before delivering the machines themselves the subsequent year. However, it was impossible to cover up the company’s loss of market share. U.S. firms, with GCA as the leader, controlled 85 percent of the global market for semiconductor lithography equipment in 1978. A decade later this figure had dropped to 50 percent. GCA hadno plan to turn things around.

Greenberg himself aimed criticism at the company’s employees. “He would use unbelievable four-letter words,” one subordinate remembered. Another recalled a decision to ban high-heeled shoes, which Greenberg thought ruined the company’s carpets. As tension grew, the receptionist developed a code with fellow employees, turning on a ceiling light to denote that Greenberg was in the building, and turning it off when he left.Everyone could breathe a bit easier when he was out. But this couldn’t stop America’s lithography leader from hurtling toward crisis.

CHAPTER 18The Crude Oil of the 1980s

On a chilly spring evening in Palo Alto, Bob Noyce, Jerry Sanders, and Charlie Sporck metunder a sloping, pagoda-style roof. Ming’s Chinese Restaurant was a staple of the Silicon Valley lunch circuit. But America’s tech titans weren’t at Ming’s for its famous Chinese chicken salad. Noyce, Sanders, and Sporck had all started their careers at Fairchild: Noyce the technological visionary; Sanders the marketing showman; Sporck the manufacturing boss barking at his employees to build faster, cheaper, better. A decade later they’d become competitors as CEOs of three of America’s biggest chipmakers. But as Japan’s market share grew, they decided it was time to band together again. At stake was the future of America’s semiconductor industry. Huddled over a table in a private dining room at Ming’s, they devised a new strategy to save it. After a decade of ignoring the government, they were turning to Washington for help.

Semiconductors are the“crude oil of the 1980s,” Jerry Sanders declared, “and the people who control the crude oil will control the electronics industry.” As CEO of AMD, one of America’s biggest chipmakers, Sanders had plenty of self-interested reasons to describe his main product as strategically crucial. But was he wrong? Throughout the 1980s, America’s computer industry expanded rapidly, as PCs were made small enough and cheap enough for an individual home or office.Every business was coming to rely on them. Computers couldn’t work without integrated circuits. Nor, by the 1980s, could planes, automobiles, camcorders, microwaves, or the Sony Walkman. Every American now had semiconductors in their houses and cars; many used dozens of chips daily. Like oil, they were impossible to live without. Didn’t this make them “strategic”? Shouldn’t America be worried Japan was becoming “the Saudi Arabia of semiconductors”?

The oil embargoes of 1973 and 1979 had demonstrated to many Americans the risks of relying on foreign production. When Arab governments cut oil exports to punish America for supporting Israel, the U.S. economy plunged into a painful recession. A decade of stagflation and political crises followed. American foreign policy fixated on the Persian Gulf and securing its oil supplies. President Jimmy Carter declared the region one of “the vital interests of the United States of America.” Ronald Reagan deployed the U.S. Navy to escort oil tankers in and out of the Gulf. George H. W. Bush went to war with Iraq in part to liberate Kuwait’s oil fields. When America said that oil was a “strategic” commodity, it backed the claim with military force.

Sanders wasn’t asking for the U.S. to send the Navy halfway across the world to secure supplies of silicon. But shouldn’t the government find a way to help its struggling semiconductor firms? In the 1970s, Silicon Valley firms had forgotten about the government as they replaced defense contracts with civilian computer and calculator markets. In the 1980s, they crawled sheepishly back to Washington. After their dinner at Ming’s, Sanders, Noyce, and Sporck joined other CEOs to create the Semiconductor Industry Association to lobby Washington to support the industry.

When Jerry Sanders described chips as “crude oil,” the Pentagon knew exactly what he meant. In fact, chips were even more strategic than petroleum. Pentagon officials knew just how important semiconductors were to American military primacy. Using semiconductor technology to “offset” the Soviet conventional advantage in the Cold War had been American strategy since the mid-1970s, when Bob Noyce’ssinging partner Bill Perry ran the Pentagon’s research and engineering division. American defense firms had been instructed to pack their newest planes, tanks, and rockets with as many chips as possible, enabling better guidance, communication, and command and control. In terms of producing military power, the strategy was working better than anyone except Bill Perry had thought possible.

There was only one problem. Perry had assumed that Noyce and his other Silicon Valley neighbors would remain on top of the industry. But in 1986, Japan had overtaken America in the number of chips produced. By the end of the 1980s, Japan was supplying 70 percent of the world’s lithography equipment. America’s share—in an industry invented by Jay Lathrop in a U.S. military lab—had fallen to 21 percent. Lithography is“simply something we can’t lose, or we will find ourselves completely dependent on overseas manufacturers to make our most sensitive stuff,” one Defense Department official told theNew York Times. But if the trends of the mid-1980s continued, Japan would dominate the DRAM industry and drive major U.S. producers out of business. The U.S. might find itself even more reliant on foreign chips and semiconductor manufacturing equipment than it was on oil, even at the depths of the Arab embargo. Suddenly Japan’s subsidies for its chip industry, widely blamed for undermining American firms like Intel and GCA, seemed like a national security issue.

The Defense Department recruited Jack Kilby, Bob Noyce, and other industry luminaries to prepare a report on how to revitalize America’s semiconductor industry. Noyce and Kilby spent hours at brainstorming sessions in the Washington suburbs, working with defense industrial experts and Pentagon officials. Kilby had long worked closely with the Defense Department, given Texas Instruments’ role as a major supplier of electronics for weapons systems. IBM and Bell Labs also had deep connections with Washington. But Intel’s leaders had previously portrayed themselves as“Silicon Valley cowboys who didn’t need anybody’s help,” as one defense official put it. The fact that Noyce was willing to spend time at the Defense Department was a sign of how serious athreat the semiconductor industry faced—and how dire the impact on the U.S. military could be.

The U.S. military was more dependent on electronics—and thus on chips—than ever before. By the 1980s, the report found, around 17 percent of military spending went toward electronics, compared to 6 percent at the end of World War II. Everything from satellites to early warning radars to self-guided missiles depended on advanced chips.The Pentagon’s task force summarized the ramifications in four bullet points, underlining the key conclusions:

U.S. military forces depend heavily ontechnological superiorityto win.

Electronicsis the technology that can be leveraged most highly.

Semiconductorsare the key to leadership in electronics.

U.S. defense will soondepend on foreign sourcesfor state-of-the-art technology in semiconductors.

Of course, Japan was officially a Cold War ally—at least for now. When the U.S. had occupied Japan in the years immediately after World War II, it had written Japan’s constitution to make militarism impossible. But after the two countries had signed a mutual defense pact in 1951, the U.S. began cautiously to encourage Japanese rearmament, seeking military support against the Soviet Union. Tokyo agreed, but it capped its military spending around 1 percent of Japan’s GDP. This was intended to reassure Japan’s neighbors, who viscerally remembered the country’s wartime expansionism. However, because Japan didn’t spend heavily on arms, it had more funds to invest elsewhere. The U.S. spent five to ten times more on defense relative to the size of its economy. Japan focused on growing its economy, while America shouldered the burden of defending it.

The results were more spectacular than anyone had expected. Once derided as a country of transistor salesmen, Japan was now the world’s second-largest economy. It was challenging American industrialdominance in areas that were crucial to U.S. military power. Washington had long urged Tokyo to let the United States contain the Communists while Japan expanded its foreign trade, but this division of labor no longer seemed very favorable to the United States. Japan’s economy had grown at unprecedented speed, while Tokyo’s success in high-tech manufacturing was now threatening America’s military edge. Japan’s advance had caught everyone by surprise.“You don’t want the same thing to happen to semiconductors as happened to the TV industry, to the camera industry,” Sporck told the Pentagon. “Without semiconductors you’re in nowheresville.”

CHAPTER 19Death Spiral

“We’re in a death spiral,” Bob Noyce told a reporter in 1986. “Can you name a field in which the U.S. is not falling behind?” In his more pessimistic moments, Noyce wondered whether Silicon Valley would end up like Detroit, its flagship industry withering under the impact of foreign competition. Silicon Valley had a schizophrenic relationship with the government, simultaneously demanding to be left alone and requesting that it help. Noyce exemplified the contradiction. He’d spent his earliest days at Fairchild avoiding Pentagon bureaucracy while benefitting from the Cold War−era space race. Now he thought the government needed to help the semiconductor industry, but he still feared that Washington would impede innovation. Unlike in the days of the Apollo program, by the 1980sover 90 percent of semiconductors were bought by companies and consumers, not the military. It was hard for the Pentagon to shape the industry because the Defense Department was no longer Silicon Valley’s most important customer.

Moreover, in Washington there was little agreement on whether Silicon Valley merited government help. After all, many industries were suffering from Japanese competition, from car factories to steel mills. The chip industry and the Defense Department argued that semiconductors were “strategic.” But many economists argued that there was no good definition of what “strategic” meant. Were semiconductorsmore “strategic” than jet engines? Or industrial robots? “Potato chips, computer chips, what’s the difference?” one Reagan Administration economist was widely quoted as saying. “They’re all chips. A hundred dollars of one or a hundred dollars of the other is still a hundred.” The economist in question denies having ever compared potatoes to silicon. But the point was a reasonable one. If Japanese firms could produce DRAM chips at a lower price, perhaps the U.S. was better off buying them and pocketing the cost savings. If so, American computers would be cheaper as a result—and the computer industry might advance more quickly.

The question of support for semiconductors was decided by lobbying in Washington. One issue on which Silicon Valley and free market economists agreed was taxes. Bob Noycetestified to Congress in favor of cutting the capital gains tax from 49 percent to 28 percent and advocated loosening financial regulation to let pension funds invest in venture capital firms. After these changes, a flood of money rushed into the venture capital firms on Palo Alto’s Sand Hill Road. Next, Congress tightened intellectual property protections via the Semiconductor Chip Protection Act, after Silicon Valley executives like Intel’s Andy Grove testified to Congress that legal copying by Japanese firms was undermining America’s market position.

As Japan’s DRAM market share grew, however, tax cuts and copyright changes seemed insufficient. The Pentagon was unwilling to bet its defense industrial base on the future impact of copyright law. Silicon Valley CEOs lobbied for even more help. Noyce estimated that he spent half his time in the 1980s in Washington. Jerry Sanders attacked the “subsidies and nurturing, targeting and protection of markets” that Japan had pursued. “The Japanese subsidies have been in the billions,” Sanders declared. Even after the U.S. and Japan reached an agreement to eliminate tariffs on semiconductor trade, Silicon Valley struggled to sell Japan more chips. Trade negotiators compared negotiating with the Japanese to peeling an onion. “The whole thing is a rather zen experience,” one U.S. trade negotiator reported, with discussions ending withphilosophical questions like “what is an onion, anyway.” U.S.DRAM sales into Japan barely budged.

Prodded by the Pentagon and lobbied by industry, the Reagan administration eventually decided to act. Even former free traders like Reagan’s secretary of state George Shultz concluded that Japan would only open its market if the U.S. threatened tariffs. America’s chip industry lodged a series of formal complaints against Japanese firms for “dumping” cheap chips in the U.S. market. The claim that Japanese firms were selling below production cost was hard to prove. U.S. firms cited Japanese competitors’ low cost of capital; Japan responded by saying that interest rates were lower across Japan’s economy. Both sides had a point.

In 1986, with the threat of tariffs looming, Washington and Tokyo cut a deal. Japan’s government agreed to put quotas on its exports of DRAM chips, limiting the number that were sold to the U.S. By decreasing supply, the agreement drove up the price of DRAM chips everywhere outside of Japan, to the detriment of American computer producers, which were among the biggest buyers of Japan’s chips.Higher prices actually benefitted Japan’s producers, which continued to dominate the DRAM market. Most American producers were already in the process of exiting the memory chip market. So despite the trade deal, only a few U.S. firms continued to produce DRAM chips. The trade restrictions redistributed profits within the tech industry, but they couldn’t save most of America’s memory chip firms.

Congress tried one final way to help. One of Silicon Valley’s complaints was that Japan’s government helped firms coordinate their R&D efforts and provided funds for this purpose. Many people in America’s high-tech industry thought Washington should replicate these tactics. In 1987, a group of leading chipmakers and the Defense Departmentcreated a consortium called Sematech, funded half by the industry and half by the Pentagon.

Sematech was based on the idea that the industry needed more collaboration to stay competitive. Chipmakers needed bettermanufacturing equipment, while the firms that produced this equipment needed to know what chipmakers were looking for. CEOs of equipment firms complained that “companies like TI, Motorola, and IBM… just would not open up about their technology.” Without an understanding of what technology these companies were working on, it was impossible to sell to them. Chipmakers, meanwhile, grumbled about the reliability of the machines they depended on. In the late 1980s, Intel’s equipment was running only 30 percent of the time due to maintenance and repairs,one employee estimated.

Bob Noyce volunteered to lead Sematech. He was already de facto retired from Intel, having turned over the reins to Gordon Moore and Andy Grove a decade earlier. As the co-inventor of the integrated circuit and founder of two of America’s most successful startups, he had the best technical and business credentials in the industry. No one could match his charisma or his connections in Silicon Valley. If anyone could resuscitate the chip industry, it was the person with the strongest claim to have created it.

Under Noyce’s leadership, Sematech was a strange hybrid, neither a company nor a university nor a research lab. No one knew exactly what it was supposed to do. Noyce started by trying to help manufacturing equipment companies like GCA, many of which had strong technology but struggled to create durable businesses or effective manufacturing processes.Sematech organized seminars on reliability and good management skills, offering a sort of mini-MBA. It also began coordinating between equipment companies and chipmakers to align their production schedules. There was no point in a chipmaker preparing a new generation of chipmaking technology if the lithography or deposition equipment wasn’t ready. Equipment firms didn’t want to launch a new piece of machinery unless chipmakers were prepared to use it. Sematech helped them agree on production schedules. This wasn’t exactly the free market, but Japan’s biggest firms had excelled with this type of coordination. Anyway, what other choice did Silicon Valley have?

Noyce’s focus, however, was saving America’s lithography industry. Fifty-one percent of Sematech funding went to American lithography firms. Noyce explained the logic simply: lithography got half the money because it was“half the problem” facing the chip industry. It was impossible to make semiconductors without lithography tools, but the only remaining major U.S. producers were struggling to survive. America might soon be reliant on foreign equipment. Testifying to Congress in 1989, Noyce declared that “Sematech may likely be judged, in large part, as to how successful it is in saving America’s optical stepper makers.”

This was exactly what employees at GCA, the ailing Massachusetts manufacturer of lithography tools, were hoping to hear. After the company had invented the wafer stepper, a half decade of mismanagement and bad luck had left GCA a small player, far behind Japan’s Nikon and Canon and the Netherlands’ ASML. But when Peter Simone, GCA’s president, called Noyce to discuss whether Sematech could help GCA, Noyce told him flatly:“You’re done.”

Few people in the chip industry could see how GCA could recover. Intel, which Noyce had founded, relied heavily on Nikon, GCA’s primary Japanese competitor. “Why don’t you come for one day,” Simone proposed, hoping to convince Noyce that GCA could still produce cutting-edge machinery. Noyce agreed, and when he arrived in Massachusettshe decided that day to buy $13 million worth of GCA’s newest equipment, as part of a program to share American-built semiconductor equipment with U.S. chipmakers and encourage them to buy more domestically produced tools.

Sematech bet hugely on GCA, giving the company contracts to produce deep-ultraviolet lithography equipment that was at the cutting edge of the industry’s capabilities. GCA delivered far beyond expectations, living up to its earlier reputation for technological brilliance. Soon independent industry analysts were describing GCA’s newest steppers as “the best in the world.” The company even won a customer service award, casting off its reputation for being mediocre in that department. The software that GCA’s machines used was far betterthan the company’s Japanese rivals.“They were ahead of their time,” recalled one lithography expert at Texas Instruments who tested GCA’s newest machines.

But GCA still didn’t have a viable business model. Being “ahead of your time” is good for scientists but not necessarily for manufacturing firms seeking sales. Customers had already gotten comfortable with equipment from competitors like Nikon, Canon, and ASML, and didn’t want to take a risk on new and unfamiliar tools from a company whose future was uncertain. If GCA went bankrupt, customers might struggle to get spare parts. Unless a big customer could be convinced to sign a major contract with GCA, the company would spiral toward collapse. It lost $30 million between 1988 and 1992, despite $70 million in support from Sematech. Even Noyce could never convince Intel, the company he’d founded, toswitch its allegiance from Nikon.

In 1990, Noyce, GCA’s greatest supporter at Sematech, died of a heart attack after his morning swim. He’d built Fairchild and Intel, invented the integrated circuit, and commercialized the DRAM chips and microprocessors that undergird all modern computing. Lithography, however, proved immune to Noyce’s magic. By 1993, GCA’s owner, a company called General Signal, announced it would sell GCA or close it. As the clock ticked toward this self-imposed deadline, no buyer could be found. Sematech, which had already provided millions in funding for GCA, decided to pull the plug. GCA appealed one final time to the government for help, with top national security officials considering whether U.S. foreign policy required saving GCA. They concludednothing could be done. The company shut its doors and sold off its equipment, joining a long list of firms vanquished by Japanese competition.

CHAPTER 20The Japan That Can Say No

After decades of making millions by selling Americans electronics, Sony’sAkio Morita began to detect “a certain arrogance” in his American friends. When he first licensed transistor technology in the 1950s, the U.S. was the world’s tech leader. Since then, America had faced crisis after crisis. The disastrous war in Vietnam, racial tension, urban unrest, the humiliation of Watergate, a decade of stagflation, a gaping trade deficit, and now industrial malaise. After each new shock, America’s allure dimmed.

On his first trip abroad in 1953, Morita had seen America as a country “that seemed to have everything.” He was served ice cream with a tiny paper umbrella on the top. “This is from your country,” the waiter told him, a humiliating reminder of how far behind Japan was. Three decades later, however, everything had changed. New York had seemed “glamorous” on Morita’s first visit in the 1950s. Now it was dirty, crime-ridden, and bankrupt.

Sony, meanwhile, had become a global brand. Morita redefined Japan’s image abroad. The country was no longer seen as a producer of paper umbrellas for ice cream sundaes. Now it built the world’s most high-tech goods. Morita, whose family owned a major stake in Sony, had gotten rich. He had a powerful network of friends on Wall Street and in Washington. He cultivated the art of the New York dinner party asmeticulously as other Japanese approached a traditional tea ceremony. Whenever Morita was in New York, he hosted the city’s rich and famous at his apartment on 82nd and Fifth, just across from the Metropolitan Museum of Art. Morita’s wife Yoshiko even wrote a book explaining American dinner party customs to unfamiliar Japanese readers, titledMy Thoughts on Home Entertaining. (Kimonos were discouraged; “whenever everyone wears the same kind of outfit, harmony is enhanced.”)

The Moritas enjoyed entertaining, but their dinner parties served a professional purpose, too. As commercial tension between the U.S. and Japan increased, Morita served as informal ambassador, explaining Japan to American powerbrokers. David Rockefeller was a personal friend. Morita dined with Henry Kissinger whenever the former secretary of state visited Japan. When private equity titan Pete Peterson took Morita to Augusta National, a golf club popular with CEOs, he was shocked to discover that “Akio had met them all.” Not only that—Morita arranged a dinner with each of his acquaintances while at Augusta. “He must have had aboutten meals a day while he was staying here,” Peterson recounted.

Morita at first found the power and wealth represented by his American friends seductive. As America lurched from crisis to crisis, however, the aura around men like Henry Kissinger and Pete Peterson began to wane. Their country’s system wasn’t working—butJapan’s was. By the 1980s, Morita perceived deep problems in America’s economy and society. America had long seen itself as Japan’s teacher, but Morita thought America had lessons to learn as it struggled with a growing trade deficit and the crisis in its high-tech industries. “The United States has been busy creating lawyers,” Morita lectured, while Japan has “been busier creating engineers.” Moreover, American executives were too focused on “this year’s profit,” in contrast to Japanese management, which was “long range.” American labor relations were hierarchical and “old style,” without enough training or motivation for shop-floor employees. Americans should stop complaining about Japan’s success, Morita believed. It was time to tell his American friends: Japan’s system simply worked better.

In 1989, Morita set out his views in a collection of essays titledThe Japan That Can Say No:Why Japan Will Be First Among Equals. The book was coauthored with Shintaro Ishihara, a controversial far-right politician. While just a university student, Ishihara had risen to fame by publishing a sexually charged novel titledSeason of the Sun, which was awarded Japan’s most prestigious literary prize for new writers. He parlayed this fame, enhanced by derogatory diatribes against foreigners, into a parliamentary seat as a member of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party. In parliament, Ishihara agitated for Japan to assert itself internationally and to change the country’s constitution, which had been dictated by U.S. occupation authorities after World War II, to let Tokyo build a powerful military.

It was hard to imagine a more provocative coauthor for Morita to have chosen as he lectured the United States about its internal crises. The book itself was a series of essays, some written by Morita and others by Ishihara. Morita’s essays mostly rehashed his arguments about the failings of American business practices, though chapter titles such as “America, You Had Better Give Up Certain Arrogance” had a harsher tone than Morita usually expressed at New York dinner parties. Even the always gracious Morita found it difficult to mask his view that Japan’s technological prowess had earned it a position among the world’s great powers. “Militarily we could never defeat the United States,” Morita told an American colleague at the time,“but economically we can overcome the United States and become number one in the world.”

Ishihara never hesitated to say exactly what he was thinking. His first novel was a story of unconstrained sexual urges. His political career embraced the most unsavory instincts of Japanese nationalism. His essays inThe Japan That Can Say Nocalled for Japan to declare independence from an overbearing America that had bossed Japan around for too long. “Let’s not give into America’s bluster!” one of Ishihara’s essays proclaimed. “Restrain America!” declared another. Japan’s far right had always been unhappy with their country’s secondary status in an America-led world. Morita’s willingness to coauthor a bookwith someone like Ishihara shocked many Americans, showing that a threatening nationalism still lurked within the capitalist class that Washington had cultivated. The U.S. strategy since 1945 had been to bind Japan to the U.S. via exchanges of trade and technology. Akio Morita was arguably the greatest beneficiary of America’s tech transfers and its market openness. If evenhewas questioning America’s leading role, Washington needed to rethink its game plan.

What madeThe Japan That Can Say Notruly frightening to Washington was not only that it articulated a zero-sum Japanese nationalism, but that Ishihara had identified a way to coerce America. Japan didn’t need to submit to U.S. demands, Ishihara argued, because America relied on Japanese semiconductors. American military strength, he noted, required Japanese chips. “Whether it be mid-range nuclear weapons or inter-continental ballistic missiles, what ensures the accuracy of weapons is none other than compact, high-precision computers,” he wrote. “If Japanese semiconductors are not used, this accuracy cannot be assured.” Ishihara speculated that Japan could even provide advanced semiconductors to the USSR, tipping the military balance in the Cold War.

“The 1-megabit semiconductors which are used in the hearts of computers, which carry hundreds of millions of circuits in an area which is one-third the size of your little fingernail, are only made in Japan,” Ishihara noted.“Japan has nearly a 100 percent share of these 1-megabit semiconductors. “Now Japan is at least five years ahead of the U.S. in this area and the gap is widening,” he continued. Computers using Japan’s chips were “central to military strength and therefore central to Japanese power… in that sense, Japan has become a very important country.”

Other Japanese leaders appeared to take a similarly defiant nationalist view. One senior Foreign Ministry official was quoted as arguing that “Americans simply don’t want to recognize that Japan has won the economic race against the West.” Soon-to-be-prime-minister Kiichi Miyazawa publicly noted that cutting off Japanese electronics exports would cause “problems in the U.S. economy,” and predicted that “the Asian economic zone will outdo the North American zone.” Amid thecollapse of its industries and its high-tech sector, America’s future, a Japanese professor declared, was that of “a premier agrarian power, agiant version of Denmark.”

In the U.S.,The Japan That Can Say Nosparked fury. It was translated and circulated in unofficial form by the CIA. One irate congressman entered the entire book—still published in English only unofficially—into the Congressional Record to publicize it. Bookstores reported that customers in Washington were“going absolutely bananas” trying to find bootleg copies. Morita sheepishly had the official English translation published only with Ishihara’s essays, without his contributions. “I now regret my association with this project,” Morita told reporters, “because it has caused so much confusion.I don’t feel U.S. readers understand that my opinions are separate from Ishihara’s. My ‘essays’ express my opinions and his ‘essays’ express his opinions.”

YetThe Japan That Can Say Nowas controversial not because of its opinions, but because of the facts. The U.S. had fallen decisively behind in memory chips. If this trend persisted, geopolitical shifts would inevitably follow. It didn’t take a far-right provocateur like Ishihara to recognize this; American leaders foresaw similar trends. The same year that Ishihara and Morita publishedThe Japan That Can Say No, former defense secretary Harold Brown published an article that drew much the same conclusions. “High Tech Is Foreign Policy,” Brown titled the article. If America’s high-tech position was deteriorating, its foreign policy position was at risk, too.

This was an embarrassing admission for Brown, the Pentagon leader who’d hired Bill Perry in 1977 and empowered him to put semiconductors and computing power at the core of the military’s most important new weapons systems. Brown and Perry succeeded in convincing the military to embrace microprocessors, but they hadn’t anticipated Silicon Valley losing its lead. Their strategy paid off in terms of new weapons systems, but many of these now depended on Japan.

“Japan leads in memory chips, which are at the heart of consumer electronics,” Brown admitted. “The Japanese are rapidly catching upin logic chips and application-specific integrated circuits.” Japan also led in certain types of tools, like lithography equipment, needed to build chips. The best result Brown could foresee was a future in which the U.S. would protect Japan, but would do so with weapons powered by Japanese tech. America’s strategy to turn Japan into a transistor salesman seemed to have gone horribly wrong.

Would Japan, a first-class technological power, be satisfied with second-class military status? If Japan’s success in DRAM chips was any guide, it was set to overtake the United States in almost every industry that mattered. Why wouldn’t it seek military dominance, too? If so, what would the U.S. do? In 1987,the CIA tasked a team of analysts with forecasting Asia’s future. They saw Japanese dominance of semiconductors as evidence of an emerging “Pax Niponica”—an East Asian economic and political bloc led by Japan. American power in Asia had been built on technological dominance, military might, and trade and investment links that knit together Japan, Hong Kong, South Korea, and the countries of Southeast Asia. From the first Fairchild assembly plant on Hong Kong’s Kowloon Bay, integrated circuits had been an integral feature of America’s position in Asia. U.S. chipmakers built facilities from Taiwan to South Korea to Singapore. These territories were defended from Communist incursions not only by military force but also by economic integration, as the electronics industry sucked the region’s peasants off farms—where rural poverty often inspired guerilla opposition—into good jobs assembling electronic devices for American consumption.

America’s supply chain statecraft had worked brilliantly in fending off Communists, but by the 1980s, the primary beneficiary looked to have been Japan. Its trade and foreign investment had grown massively. Tokyo’s role in Asia’s economics and politics was expanding inexorably. If Japan could so swiftly establish dominance over the chip industry, what would stop it from dethroning America’s geopolitical preeminence, too?