INTRODUCTION

Estimated Reading Time:6 minutes, 41 seconds

While some people have normal interests like sports, music, and cooking, as strange as it might sound, I have always been obsessed with becoming as productive as possible.

I can’t remember when I was first bit by the productivity bug. It could have been when I picked upDavid Allen’s canonicalGetting Things Donebook in high school, when I started diving deep into productivity blogs as a young teenager, or when I began exploring my parents’ collection of psychology books around the same time—but I’ve been obsessed with productivity for the better part of a decade, and over that time I’ve brought that obsession to virtually every facet of my life.

In high school, I began to experiment with as many productivity techniques as I could find, which let me graduate with a 95 percent average while carving out huge swaths of time for myself. At Carleton University inOttawa, I studied business where I did much the same thing, deploying my favorite productivity tactics to keep an A average while doing as little work as I possibly could.

While in school, I had the chance to experiment with productivity techniques at several real-world full-time co-op internships, including one yearlong job where I autonomously hired about two hundred students for a global telecommunications company, and another where I worked from home for a global marketing team, helping the team create marketing materials and coordinate video shoots around the world.

Because of my hard work (and productivity), my school awarded me their Co-op Student of the Year Award, and I graduated from the university with two full-time job offers.

THE POINT OF PRODUCTIVITY

I don’t mention what I’ve accomplished to try to impress you, but rather to impressuponyou how powerful of an idea productivity can be. As much as I’d sometimes like to think so, I wasn’t offered two full-time jobs out of college because I’m particularly smart or gifted. I simply think I have a very firm grasp of what it takes to become more productive and get more done on a daily basis.

Although the jobs and school were fun, at the end of the day I was truthfully much more excited that I had a chance to use both contexts as sandboxes to filter out the productivity tactics that work from the ones that didn’t.

To see the profound effects that investing in your productivity can have, look no further than to how the average American spends his or her day.According to the most recentAmerican Time Use Survey, the average employed person aged twenty-five to fifty-four with kids spends:

•8.7 hours a day working

•7.7 hours a day sleeping

•1.1 hours a day on household chores

•1.0 hours a day eating and drinking

•1.3 hours a day caring for others

•1.7 hours a day on “Other”

•2.5 hours a day on leisure activities

Every day we get twenty-four hours to live our lives in a meaningful way. But once you account for all the obligations each of us has, there really isn’t much time left; a paltry two and a half hours for most of us, to be exact. I’ve converted the numbers into a pie chart to illustrate just how little time in our day that is:

This is where productivity can come to the rescue.I think productivity tactics—like the ones that I discuss in this book—exist to help you accomplish everything you have to do in less time, so you can carve out more time for what’s actually important and meaningful in your life. Productivity is what makes the difference between someone who runs a company and the employees who work for her. It is also the difference between having no time or energy left at the end of the day and having a ton of time and energy left over to invest however you want.

Obviously you can use the tactics in this book however you want; my approach has always been one of striking abalance between carving out more time and energy for the things that are meaningful to me, and accomplishing more. This approach simply fits with the way I think. I like to accomplish and do cool things, but I also love having the freedom to spend my time as I please.

When you take the time to invest in your productivity, and use what you learn to carve out more time for what matters most to you, I think it’s entirely realistic that your average day could look a little more like this:

At least, that’s what I’ve found during my decade of intense experimentation with productivity.

A YEAR OF PRODUCTIVITY

I was caught on the horns of a dilemma. Both job offers I had received had great starting salaries, promises of career advancement, and looked like a lot of fun on the surface. But as I began to think about each of them more deeply, I came to the realization that they weren’t really what I wanted to do with my life.

Don’t get me wrong, I’m not some spoiled dilettante obsessed with spouting eighteenth-century French poetry all day. I just didn’t want to throw the limited time I had into a black hole that did nothing more than provide me with a paycheck every second Friday.

So I began to consider what other options I had—and suddenly everything fell into place.

During the 1960s and 1970s, theUniversity of California at Irvinewas one of a group of universities that decided to build their campuses without any paths. (I went to school in Canada, but I love this story.) Students and faculty simply walked in the grass around the campus buildings as they pleased, without following a walkway that was already paved for them. A year or so later, once the school could see where the grass was worn around the buildings, they paved overthosepaths instead. The sidewalks at UC Irvine don’t simply connect the buildings to one another in a predetermined way—they’re mapped to where people naturally want to walk.Landscape architects call these paths “desire paths.”

In a similar fashion, as I began to question the two traditional paths I had before me, I thought about what paths I had already carved out in my life that I actually wanted to continue traveling on. It only took me a few seconds to see that the thing I was most passionate about was productivity.

I knew I couldn’t explore the topic of productivity forever. When I graduated, I had about $10,000 saved up (Canadian dollars—equal to about $30 US dollars, or $1,500 inMonopolymoney). After I ran the numbers, I figured it was enough money to continue traveling down my desire path for a year, or in other words, get me through one year of exploring the topic of productivity. I also had $19,000 in student loans, so it would be a gamble. I would have to eat a lot of beans and rice, but if there was a time in my life when it made sense to make a big bet on my future, it was then. Sure, the idea of a yearlong project was a bit of a cliché, but that was simply a function of how much financial runway I had to explore the topic.

Shortly after I graduated in May of 2013, I officially declined the two full-time job offers to start a project of my own that I namedA Year of Productivity(orAYOP).

The idea behind the project was simple. For one entire year, I would devour everything I could get my hands on about productivity and write about what I learned on my website,ayearofproductivity.com.

For 365 days, I

•Read countless books and academic journal articles on productivity, delving deep into the prevailing research on the topic.

•Interviewedproductivity gurus to see how they live productively every day.

•Conducted as many productivity experiments as I could, using myself as a guinea pig to explore what it takes to become as productive as possible.

Although much of my time was spent on research and interviews to get to the bottom of what it takes to become more productive, my productivity experiments quickly became the most noteworthy part of my project—in part because I learned so many unique lessons from them (and in part because so many of them were batshit crazy). My productivity experiments included

•Meditating for 35 hours a week.

•Working 90-hour weeks.

•Waking up at 5:30 every morning to see the impact on my productivity.

•Watching 70 hours ofTED talks one week.

•Gaining 10 pounds of lean muscle mass.

•Living in total isolation.

•Drinking only water for a month.

And many more.

AYOPserved as the perfect framework to experiment with all the productivity tactics I was curious about but hadn’t had the time to research or experiment with. The purpose of my project was to dive as deeply as possible into productivity for a year, and then share everything I learned with the world.

ABOUT THIS BOOK

The Productivity Projectis the crescendo for my year of intense research and experimentation. Over the last decade I’ve read about, researched, and tested thousands of productivity hacks to filter out the ones that work from the ones that don’t. ForThe Productivity ProjectI have selectedthetwenty-fiveproductivity tactics that, among the thousands I’ve encountered, I believe will make the biggest impact on your work on a daily basis. I have personally experimented with and use every tactic in this book regularly—and I’m confident they will help you, too.

I won’t spoil too much of what’s to come, but in the chapters ahead I will reveal my favorite productivity tactics so that you can

•Identify the integral tasks in your work.

•Work on those tasks moreefficiently.

•Manage your time like a ninja.

•Quit procrastinating.

•Work smarter, not harder.

•Develop laserlike focus.

•Achieve zenlike mental clarity throughout the day.

•Have more energy than you have ever had before.

•And much more!

If that sounds like a daunting list, don’t worry—it’ll be a blast, and we’ll tackle it all one page at a time.

You ready? Let’s do this.

A NEWDEFINITION OFPRODUCTIVITY

Estimated Reading Time:9 minutes, 13 seconds

Never one to back away from a weird experiment, I registered for four months’ worth ofyoga classes about seven years ago.

Yoga classes cost as much as $25 per lesson, so when my university advertised a four-month, $60 special, I instantly jumped on board. Yoga felt like nothing more than a passing fad to me at that point, but pretty much every cute girl I knew was signing up, so I decided to try it out to, you know, see what the fuss was about.

But as the semester marched on, I found myself becoming more and more excited for the Thursday night class (surprisingly less for the girls, and more for the class itself). The class was the antithesis of the busy, hurried life I was accustomed to living, and, if anything, it afforded me the ability to slow down and actually appreciate all the accomplishments my productivity had brought about.

One of my favorite elements of the class was how it ended. Before France (our instructor, not the country) allowed us to venture back into our busy university world, she ended the class with a simple breathingmeditation, where she would guide us through mindfully observing our breath.

Those meditation sessions were only five minutes long, but I still remember how much they helped me feel calmer, more clear-headed, and more at ease than anything else I had done before.

A MEDITATION ON PRODUCTIVITY

As the years passed in college, my fondness for meditation deepened. As I dove deeper and deeper into the ritual, I went from meditating five minutes a day, to ten minutes, to fifteen minutes, to twenty minutes, and eventually, a few years ago, to thirty minutes every day. That’s longer than most people meditate, but I chose to meditate instead of do other (more “productive”) things simply because I loved it so much.

I think a lot of people make meditation out to be way more complicated than it actually is, but I won’t get too technical here about the ritual (I talk about meditation more onthis pageif you’re curious). Basically, I simply sit on a chair or a cushion—usually in my work clothes—and observe my breath. I’m not into rituals like chanting or focusing on my “third eye” (whatever that means). I simply focus on my breath for thirty minutes, and when my mind inevitably wanders away from my breath to focus on something more interesting, I gently bring my attention back to my breath. I continue to observe its natural ebbs and flows until my meditation timer rings after thirty minutes. It’s frustrating at times, but over time the ritual grew to easily be the most calming part of my day.

Over the last several years, while exploring meditation further, I also delved more deeply into productivity. Whenever I wasn’t working as efficiently as possible, I would research books on how to become more productive, catch up on the latest productivity hacks, and keep up with all the productivity blogs and websites I followed. After seeing both interests snowballing in tandem I made the decision to startA Year of Productivity.

Until that point, I hadn’t given much thought as to how meditation and productivity were connected. But after examining how every element of my life either added to or subtracted from my productivity, I reached a devastating conclusion: my meditation ritual and newlylaunched yearlong productivity experiment could not have been more different.

The problem wasn’t so much with the ritual itself—but rather with my understanding of the mindset behind it. I practicedmeditation and mindfulness as a way of doing less, at a slower pace, and I saw productivity as a way of doing more, faster. After the first few months of my project, I even began to feel guilty about my meditation ritual. After all, shouldn’t I be getting realwork done during that time, instead of sitting in a meditative pose and doing nothing for half an hour?

When I had to choose between working for thirty minutes longer and meditating for thirty minutes, I would almost always choose to work longer and get more work done, and not meditate at all.

Eventually, a couple of months into my project, I stopped meditating entirely.

WORKING ON AUTOPILOT

In the weeks that followed I began to work completely differently. Instead of taking frequent breaks to step back from my project, I would work straight through my tiredness and fatigue to try to write and experiment as much as possible. As I began to work at a more hurried pace, I felt less calm and focused throughout the day. My head wasn’t as clear, and I became less excited by the work I was doing—even though I was exploring my deepest passion. Worst of all, I began to work less deliberately, and a lot more often on autopilot. Because of all this, I became muchlessproductive (I’ll talk about how I measured my productivity during my project onthis page).

This is, of course, not a book about meditation. I know that not everyone will be attracted by the practice. In fact, my guess is that only a fraction of you will give it a shot. But I think there is something to be said for themindsetbehind the practice, because it helps you slow down and work calmly and deliberately throughout the day.

Meditation didn’t have a profound impact on my productivity because it helped me relax, clear my head, or relieve my stress after a long day—though it certainly did that.Meditation had such a profound effecton myproductivity because it allowed me to slow down enough so that I could work deliberately and not onautopilot. I think one of the biggest mistakes people make when they invest effort in improving their productivity is that they continue to work automatically, in response to the work that comes their way. But I’ve found that when you work on autopilot, it’s virtually impossible to step back from your work to determine what’s important, how to think more creatively, how to work smarter instead of just harder, and how to take control over what you’re working on instead of working on the tasks that other people throw (or in most cases, email) your way.

After I stopped meditating every day, I began to work more frantically and less deliberately, which prevented me from working smarter. And that wiped out the productivity gains I had made.

THE MONK AND THE COCAINE-FUELED STOCK TRADER

Naturally, not everyone approaches his or her work with the same degree of deliberateness. Take, for example, the world’s most devout monk, who meditates all day, and takes an hour to do anything because he wants to do it slowly and mindfully. The monk does as little as possible, as deliberately as possible, and can do things so purposefully because he moves at a snail’s pace.

The opposite of the monk is the cocaine-fueled stock trader, who works quickly, automatically, at the most frenzied pace imaginable. Unlike the monk, the stock trader doesn’t often step back from what he works on to reflect on its value or meaning—he simply tries to do as much as possible, as quickly as possible. Because he works so fast, he doesn’t have any spare time or attention to do things purposefully or with intention.

I’ve experimented with both paces (but never with cocaine) and have found that neither approach is ideal as far as productivity is concerned. Meditating all day may bring you inner peace, and working at a frenzied pace may be incredibly stimulating, but productivity has nothing to do with how much youdo, and everything to do with how much you accomplish.As a monk or a cocaine-fueled stock trader, you won’t accomplish much. When you work like a monk, you work too slowly to accomplish much of anything, and when you work like a stock trader, you’re too hurried to step back from your work to identify what’s important so that you work smarter instead of just harder.

The most productive people work at a pace somewhere between the monk and the stock trader—fast enough to get everything done, and slowly enough so they can identify what’s important and then work deliberately and with intention.

THE THREEINGREDIENTS OF PRODUCTIVITY

Although it’s impossible to become more productive when you work on autopilot today, this wasn’t always the case.

Fifty years ago, about a third of all U.S. employees worked in factories. In afactory, or in a methodical, assembly-line kind of job, productivity was simpler: the more widgets you produced in the same amount of time, the more efficient and productive you were. Your work didn’t change much, there was very little room to work smarter instead of harder, and you didn’t have much of a say over what you worked on or when you worked on it.

Many people still work in factories or have factory-type jobs, but if you picked up this book, chances are you don’t. Chances are your work involves moreintellectual capital than in the past and is intricate and ever changing, and you have more freedom than ever before to work on what you want, when you want. You may not havetotalcontrol over your work, but you have a lot more control than someone who worked in a factory or on an assembly line half a century ago.

In most jobs today—including in the ones I’ve had, and in the kinds of jobs every high-performing person I have interviewed for this book has—efficiency is no longer enough. When you have more to do than ever before, less time to do it, and unparalleled freedom and flexibility with how you get it done, productivity is no longer about how efficiently you work.Productivity is about how much youaccomplish.

That requires you to work smarter instead and manage yourtime, attention, andenergy better than ever before.

Somewhere toward the end of my project, I arrived at an epiphany: every lesson I learned fell into better management of one of three categories: my time, my attention, and my energy. Although many lessons or insights fit into more than one category, there was not a single thing I had explored that didn’t have to do with some combination of the three—and I explored some crazy approaches over the course of my project.

With factory-type jobs, managing your attention and energy wasn’t as important, because simple, repetitive work didn’t require a lot of either. Managing your timewell was good enough, so if you showed up at nine, did your job well for eight hours, and left at five, you got paid reasonably well and lived a relatively happy life.

Today, things couldn’t be more different. We have more demands than ever before on our time, an overwhelming number of distractions surrounding us, stress and pressure coming at us from every direction, work that comes home with us, beeps and notifications that follow us around all day and hijack our attention, and less time than ever before to cultivate our energy levels by doing things like exercising,eating well, or getting enough sleep.

In this new environment, the mostproductive people not only manage their time well—they also manage their attention and energy well.

Near the end of my project, I couldn’t stop marveling at how interconnected and important all three of the ingredients ofproductivity are. For example, getting enough sleep requires moretime, but it boosts yourenergyand ability to manage yourattention. Eliminating noise and distractions also takestime, but helps you manage yourattentionbetter because it provides you with more focus and clarity throughout the day. Changing yourmindset takesenergyandattention, but will let you get more done in lesstime.

All three are vitally important. If you don’t spend your time wisely, it doesn’t matter how much energy and focus you have—you won’t accomplish a lot at the end of the day. If you can’t focus or bring a lot of attention to what you’re doing, it doesn’t matter if you know what your smartest tasks are or have a ton of energy—you won’t be able to engage fully with your work and become more productive. And if you can’t manage your energy well, it doesn’t matter how well you can manage your time or attention—you’re not going to have enough fuel in the tank to get everything done that you intend to.

Perhaps most important, if you can’t manage all three—time, attention, energy—well, it is next to impossible to work deliberately and with intention throughout the day.

When we waste time, we’reprocrastinating. When we can’t manage our attention well, we’re distracted. And when we don’t cultivate our energy levels, we’re tired, or “burned out.” (Interestingly, the construct of “burnout” is relatively new; it was first identified in the 1970s—somewhere in the middle of our transition from a factory mindset to a productivity mindset in the workplace.)

In the coming chapters, I’ll talk about the most powerful time-management techniques I’ve encountered over my decade of experimenting with productivity, but I’ll spend just as much time on the best ways to manage your attention and energy. Most of us no longer work in factories, and with productivity being less about how much we do and everything to do with how much we accomplish, all three ingredients could not be more important.

It is with this new mindset and definition of productivity thatThe Productivity Projectbegins.

With more control than ever before over what you work on, and with more to work on than ever before, the absolute best place to start is determining the right things to become more productive on. Your effort toward taking control of your time, attention, and energy will be fruitless when you don’t first take stock of what tasks are the most valuable and meaningful to you.

Unfortunately, that’s a lesson I had to learn the hard way.