Part Three

THE END OFTIME MANAGEMENT

THETIME ECONOMY

Takeaway:When time was “created” by theBig Bang 13.8 billion years ago, the universe had a past, present, and future for the first time.Measuring time first became important during theindustrial revolution, whenfactory owners needed their workers to arrive on time. Today, in the knowledge economy, if you want to become more productive, managing your time should take a backseat to how you manage your energy and attention.

Estimated Reading Time:7 minutes, 2 seconds

THE BEGINNING OF TIME

Since the Big Bang, the universe has had a very distinct past, present, and future. It gave birth to, in sequence, the first nuclei, atoms, galaxies, and stars, and then closest to home, our own solar system.

Today, an inconceivably large number of galaxies exist in the known universe—approximately 100 billion of them, by most estimates—many of which are similar in size and shape to our ownMilky Way galaxy.

To me, the most fascinating part of our cosmic story isn’t the sheer number of galaxies, though. It’s that these galaxies are not standing still—as time marches forward, the galaxies are expanding farther and farther away from one another.

Time is a way of cataloging and labeling exactly when something happens relative to other things. As long as there are sequences of events to order, there will be time. Or to put it another way, without a sequenceof events that have a distinct past, present, and future, time wouldn’t exist.

WHEN TIME BECAME IMPORTANT

If you were around before the industrial revolution ended in the early 1800s, you wouldn’t have measured time down to the minute, not only because you didn’t have the technology to do so, but also because you didn’t need to. Before the industrial revolution, measuring time wasn’t as important, and most of us worked on thefarm, where we had way fewer deadlines, meetings, and events to sequence than we have today. In fact, until the first mass-market, machine-made watches were produced in the 1850s, timepieces were unobtainable by pretty much anyone except for the super rich, and most of us charted the day’s progression by looking at the sun. Because we didn’t measure time with a clock, we would speak about events relative to other events.In theMalay language, there is even the phrasepisan zapra, which roughly translates to “about the time it takes to eat a banana.”

But by the mid-1800s, technology continued to accelerate, and a pivotal shift began to take place that made time a lot more relevant:railroads began to expand across theUnited States andCanada, as well as across many other parts of the world. As they expanded, an interesting conundrum arose: no two cities kept the same time. After all, why would they? Time was consistent within each individual city, and since cities weren’t connected to one another, there was no reason for two cities to sync up.

As railroads continued to connect individual cities, though, there were often dozens oftime zones in a single state, which led to all sorts of problems for the railroad companies. After several accidents and near misses, the railroads had finally had it and decided that the sun was no longer cutting it as a timekeeper.That’s when, in 1883, railroad operators teamed up to define four simple time zones across the United States and Canada. These time zones were originally created for the railroads to use internally. To make matters even more complicated, up until 1883 the railroadsthemselveshad fifty-three different time zones they usedto track their trains. Across the United States and Canada, railroads switched to using just four time zones at exactly noon on November 18, 1883.

Thirty-five years later, in 1918, the United States officially went from using hundreds of time zones to using just four, and time zones were codified into federal law.

I find this fascinating. Even though humans have been around for two hundred thousand years, we have only been living by the clock for the last 175.

It’s a good thing for time zones, too; try to imagine how difficult it would be to coordinate a meeting or get everyone in one place for an event if each city kept different time.

In the early 1900s, around the same time that time zones were codified into law, we were in the midst of two other crucial shifts inNorth America: more and more people began working in factories, andlabor unions across the United States began fighting for (and winning) shorter, eight-hour workdays.

Within the span of a few decades, we went from selling goods we produced ourselves to helping create mass-produced goods in factories, which also meant we began to trade our time for a paycheck. While time has been ticking on for billions of years, we only began measuring it down to the minute after the industrial revolution because we finally had a reason to: time was money, and there was a direct connection between how many minutes and hours we worked and how much we produced. We had always worked for money, but it was in the factory era that how long we worked began to be exactly measured.

Almost overnight, time management had become an essential part of living in a postindustrial world and the time economy was born.

TODAY

Of course, you’re already familiar with what comes next. In the same way that we went from working on farms to working in factories, since the 1950s many of us have gone from working in factories to working in offices.

Over the last sixty years,manufacturing in the United States went from accounting for 28 percent of the country’sGDP to just 12 percent—and this shrinkage happened in the face of more and more automation. Over the same time period, the sector of theU.S. economy that has grown the mostby farhas been the Professional andBusiness Services sector, a fancy name for the chunk of the economy that includes every single high-tech, engineering, legal, consulting, and accounting company—companies likeApple,Google,Boeing,General Electric,McKinsey & Company, andDeloitte. As the manufacturing industry has wilted over the last six decades, this sector hastripledin size.

When we transitioned into thetime economy, we began to trade our time for a paycheck. But as we have transitioned into theknowledge economy, we’ve begun to trade so much more than just our time. Most people who work nonfactory jobs trade some combination of their time, attention, energy, skills, knowledge, social intelligence, network, and ultimately their productivity, for a paycheck.

Today, time is no longer money.Productivityis money.

A CRAZY IDEA

This begs the question: What does time management look like in the knowledge economy?

I’m going to present you with a crazy idea that will begin to make more and more sense the deeper you dive into this section of the book:if you want to become more productive, managing your time should take a backseat to how you manage your energy and attention.

Don’t get me wrong: time is still important—we don’t live in some hocus-pocus world where time doesn’t exist—but it’s simply notasimportant as it once was when the majority of us worked in factories, where our traditional views of managing our time arose.

Ever since there have been events to chronicle, time has ticked on, and there has been no way to stop it. For as long as we can predict, time will continue to tick on at the same rate, but whatactually fluctuateson a day-to-day basis is how much energy and attention you have. In theknowledge economy, that’s what makes or breaks how productive you are, and more important, it’s something you can actually control. Time is a necessity of work and of nature, but as far asproductivity is concerned, it should merely be the backdrop against which you work.

Take, for example, the largest relic from the time economy: the nine-to-five workday. In the time economy, the whole nine-to-five idea made a lot of sense: we had a lot of machines and people to coordinate, time was money, and running an efficient factory meant getting machines and employees in the same place at once. It made sense to pay people to work by the hour because the work performed by employees was not all that different from the work performed by machines.

Today, when productivity is about what you accomplish and not how much you produce, a nine-to-five workday makes as much sense as diligently tracking your time out on the farm. After all, what if your Biological Prime Time falls when you’re not working, and you have the most energy from 6 to 9 a.m., or from 7 to 11 p.m.? Or what if you have trouble focusing because you’re trying to multitask on a million things at once? Or what if you’re constantly bombarded by distractions and interruptions?

Time is still important—and we likely won’t go back to comparing how long something takes to eating a banana anytime soon—but today, time is just one part of three in the productivity equation.

WORKING SMARTER

I find it fascinating that it’s impossible to talk about managing your time without also talking about how you manage your attention and energy. If it sounds to you like I’m hitting the crack pipe, consider this notion: when we schedule time for something, what we’re actually doing is simply deciding when we will invest our attention and energy into the task. That’s where time management should fit into the productivity equation. Scheduling time for something is really just a way of creating attentional and energy boundaries around a task—and for that reason, your time, attention, and energy are inseparable.

Managing your time becomes important only after you understand how much energy and focus you will have throughout the day and define what you want to accomplish.

Unless you’re an entrepreneur or a CEO, you likely don’t havecompletecontrol over your time. If you work with more than one person, meetings are inevitable, and so is having to manage your time, at least to some extent. Since you don’t have complete control over the sequence of events that make up your workday—and few do—it’s essential that you carve out time for coordinating with other people. But unless you work in a factory, you at least havesomemodicum of control over your time, and over what you work on.

Some days, I schedule my entire day, and I’ve found that doing so makes me incredibly productive—especially when I form a strong intention about what I’m going to get done. But I only ever plan out my day after I account for how much attention and energy I will have, and most important, what I intend to accomplish.

During my project, I learned to work smarter instead of just harder. It has helped me accomplish things like writing the very book you’re holding in your hands. It’s not that I’m smarter or more talented—it’s that I learned the hard way how to step out of the time economy and into the knowledge economy to become more productive.

Here are a few of the best ways I discovered to do that.

WORKING LESS

Takeaway:When you work consistently long hours, or spend too much time on tasks, that’s usually not a sign that you have too much to do—it’s a sign that you’re not spending your energy and attention wisely. As one example, during my experiment to work ninety-hour workweeks, I found I accomplishedonly a bit morethan when I worked twenty-hour workweeks.

Estimated Reading Time:9 minutes, 29 seconds

WORKING NINETY-HOUR WEEKS

One of the most exciting parts of my project was that because I spent most of my time reading, researching, conducting interviews and experiments, and writing, technically speaking, I could work 168 hours every week (24 × 7) if I really wanted to. My work could expand to accommodate how much or how little time I had for it. Aside from the pressure I put on myself to get a lot done every day, I had total freedom and flexibility for how long I worked, which made productivity experiments like working ninety-hour weeks possible. (By comparison, for most of my project I worked an average of forty-six hours a week.)

Before I startedAYOP, whenever I had more work to do than I had time to do it in—which was pretty much all the time—I would usually put in longer hours so I could finish my tasks.

When you feel like your to-do list is expanding faster than the universe is, working longer hours almost always feels like the best option togetting everything done. On the surface, it makes total sense: the longer youwork, the more time you have to do everything in.

But in practice, working longer hours means having less time to refocus and recharge, which leads to more stress and lower energy.

That’s what got me curious, especially as my work quickly began to pile up during my project: Is there a better and smarter way to get everything done? Or is working longer hours simply the only option?

Fortunately, I had created the perfect test environment to find out.

To get to the bottom of the link between the number of hours spent working and productivity, I designed a productivity experiment to test out how my productivity was affected by working both insane hours and relaxed hours. For four weeks I alternated between working ninety hours one week, and twenty the next to see how working both extreme hours and shorter hours affected how much I got done every day.

During the experiment, at the end of each day and week, I asked myself the same three questions:

•How much energy and focus did I have left?

•How easily was I distracted?

•Did I accomplish what I intended to?

Every day and week I also made a list of everything I accomplished so I could compare how my hours affected my productivity.

As a science nerd I have to say that this experiment was anything but scientific. But I quickly began to discover two big, surprising lessons from it.

TWO HUGE LESSONS

After slogging through one ninety-hour week and one twenty-hour week, I quickly discovered something breathtaking when I was looking through my experiment logs: I accomplishedonly a bit moreworking ninety-hour weeks than I did in my twenty-hour weeks.

This was easily one of the more surprising findings I made during my project. It went against everything I knew about productivity; I hadalways assumed that working longer hours gave you more time to accomplish everything you need to get done.

On the surface, it made little sense—until I looked beyond how muchtimeI invested in my work, and instead looked at how muchenergy and attentionI invested in it.

When I invested more time in my work during my insane weeks, my work became a lot less urgent; on a minute-by-minute basis, I invested less energy and focus into everything I intended to get done. But when I had a limited amount of time in my twenty-hour weeks, I forced myself to expend significantlymoreenergy and focus over that shorter period of time so I could get everything done I had to do. Of course, all the pressure I felt during this experiment came from me—I didn’t have a boss, team, or any large, looming deadlines around the corner. But the lesson is just as potent:

By controlling how much time you spend on a task, you control how much energy and attention you spend on it.

The second invaluable lesson I discovered from the experiment was thateven though on paper I accomplished about the same in both long and short weeks, I felttwiceas productive working longer hours. Even though Iwasn’tspending my attention or energy wisely, I sure as hellfeltproductive.

It’s hard not to feel productive when you’re busy all day long. But busyness does not translate into productivity if it doesn’t lead you to accomplish anything.

Before I started my project, when I reflected on how productive I was at the end of each day and each week I usually made a critical mistake: I looked at how busy I was instead of how much I accomplished. Productivity is an elusive idea; because it’s hard to get a handle on just how much you accomplish every day, looking at how busy you are is a quick, down and dirty, and usually inaccurate shortcut to seeing how productive you are.

In the middle of my twenty-hour weeks, I couldn’t help but feel guilty that I wasn’t as busy as I thought I should be. Because I was working a shorter amount oftime, I perceived myself as less productive, and I became unnecessarily hard on myself because of it—even though I was spending a ton of energy and focus on what I had to get done, and I was accomplishing about the same amount of work.

This is a trap almost all of us fall into. When you have more work to do than you have time to do it in, it’s easy to trick yourself into thinking you have only two options: keep working a standard workweek and fall behind, or begin putting in more hours to get everything done.

But as I discovered during this experiment, there is a third, less obvious option that is much more powerful than spending more time on your work: learn to invest more energy and attention into your work, so you can get the same amount done in a fraction of the time.

FOR IMPORTANT THINGS, SPENDLESSTIME

When I worked twenty-hour weeks, something magical began to happen: I forced myself to expend more energy over a shorter period of time so I could get my work done more quickly.

When you limit how much time you spend on an important task, these things happen:

•You set an artificial deadline, which motivates you to expend more energy and focus over a shorter period of time.

•You create urgency around the task, because you have a limited amount of time to get it done.

•You flip some of the task’s procrastinationtriggers, because limiting the time you’ll spend on a task makes it more structured, and less boring, frustrating, and difficult.

And when you also work on the task during your prime productive time? Ahhh…That’s the sweet spot on your productivity racket.

By the way, shrinking how long you’ll work on the task is also a great way to warm up to difficult tasks that you are more likely to procrastinate on. For example, on days when I really don’t feel like exercising or meditating, I simply shrink how long I’ll meditate orexercise for in my head until I no longer feel resistance to it. For example:Can Iwork out for an hour? Naw, I feel a lot of resistance to that. Thirty minutes? Better, but still too much. How about twenty minutes? Perfect, I’ll work out for twenty minutes!Shrinking a task works wonders every time—and the hack is helpful for forming new daily habits, too. Plus, once you get started, chances are you’ll want to keep going beyond your original point of resistance.

After conducting this experiment, whenever I had an important article to write, speech to prepare, or project to crank out throughout the rest of the project, instead of scheduling an entire afternoon to work on the task, I scheduled just two or three hours for the task, usually smack-dab in the middle of my Biological Prime Time. And whenever I had a good handle on how much time, attention, and energy a task would take, I got it done.

With a limited amount of time, I had no other choice.

THE EXACT NUMBER OF HOURS YOU SHOULD WORK EVERY WEEK

If limiting how much time you spend on a task lets you get it done more efficiently, does the same rule apply to working fewer hours in general?

Intriguingly, several studies suggest that it does.

If you were to work just one hour a week, no matter how well you managed your energy and attention over that hour, you wouldn’t be all that productive. One hour of work a week simply isn’t enough time to accomplish much of anything important.

But your productivity also becomes shot when you work for too long. Working ninety hours a week for any longer than one week is a recipe for burnout. Doing so leaves you with hardly any time to recharge your energy levels and focus. Just as you can work too few hours, you can also simply work too much.

So where is the sweet spot for how many hours you should work every week?

Over the course of my project, I settled into a nice equilibrium ofworking forty-six hours a week, which was enough time for me to get everything done, while taking needed breaks to recharge my energy levels and attention over the course of the day. But studies show that the ideal number of hours to work every week is even lower than that. They suggest that optimal number is roughly thirty-five to forty hours.

On the surface, thirty-five to forty hours seems low. When your to-do list is always longer than the number of hours you have in the day, you might feel guilty if you began working forty hours a week, especially if the people around you continued to work fifty, sixty, or even more.

But studies show that after roughly thirty-five or forty hours, your productivity begins to plummet.

In the short term, there are huge productivity gains to be had by working extra hours, particularly when deadlines are fast approaching. Sometimes there is simply a ton of work to do, and you need to dedicate more time to do that work. But in the long term, working longer hours is a recipe for disaster—especially when they lead you to have less time to cultivate your attention and energy, as I’ll discuss in the next chapters. After thirty-five to forty hours of work, studies show that your marginal productivity begins to drop, until “at approximately eight 60-hour weeks, the total work done is the same as what would have been done in eight 40-hour weeks.” The same study found that with seventy- and eighty-hour weeks, you reach the same breakeven point in just three weeks.In working ninety hours a week, I stumbled upon that breakeven point in just two weeks, even though the two weeks were separated by a luxurious twenty-hour week.

But often even in theshortterm, working longer hours can decrease your productivity.One study found that when you work sixty-hour weeks, in order to accomplish one more hour of work, you need to worktwohours of overtime.Yet another study found that your productivity “falls off a cliff after 55 hours—so much so that someone who puts in 70 hours produces nothing more with those extra 15 hours.”

Beyond a certain point, you simply begin to do more busywork than important or meaningful work. You’ll feel a lot less guilty, like I did when working ninety hours a week, but you’ll also be a lot less productive.

In the time economy, when work required a lot lessenergy and attention, and there was a direct correlation between how many hours you worked and how much you produced, working insane hours would have made you much more productive. Today, though, the equation has changed. Since your time, attention, and energy all contribute to your productivity, working long hours can destroy your productivity because doing so compromises your energy and focus.

In the knowledge economy, the most productive people don’t only manage their time well—they also manage their energy and attention well. Limiting how much time you spend on your work—whether on an important task or on your work in general—is a great way to spend your time, attention, and energy wisely. Depending on how much control you have over when you work, setting limits for how long you work in general—even reasonable limits like working for thirty-five hours—may not be realistic. But whenever possible, it’s worth setting limits for how long you work so you spend more energy on what you have to get done, not more valuable time.

Time required:1 minute

Energy/Focus Required:4/10

Value:8/10

Fun:8.5/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll learn to expend more energy and attention on your work to get things done in a fraction of the time.

The challenge for this chapter is simple: tomorrow, limit how much time you’ll spend on an important task, and stick to that limit.

My favorite way to limit how much time I spend on something is to simply set a countdown timer on my phone for about half of the amount of time I think a task will take. If I think I need four hours to crank out an important presentation, I’ll schedule just two—during my Biological Prime Time if I can.

This tactic won’t work for every single item on your task list, but it works wonders on tasks that are important and that have a deadline that’s fast approaching.

Once you start limiting how much time you’ll spend on specific tasks, my bet is that you’ll also begin to limit how long you workin general. Consistently working for more than thirty-five or forty hours a week makes you less productive over time, because it leads you to make more mistakes and poorer decisions, both of which can take a lot of time to fix. It also causes you to miss new ideas, opportunities, shortcuts, and opportunities to work smarter instead of just harder.

When you work consistently long hours, or spend too much time on tasks, that’s usually not a sign that you have too much to do—it’s a sign that you’re not spending your energy and attention wisely.

ENERGY ENLIGHTENMENT

Takeaway:Some time management is inevitable, but you’ll accomplish a lot more when you work on your most important and meaningful tasks when you have the most energy—not when you have the most time. Figure out when your prime time is; it’s sacred, and it’s worth spending wisely.

Estimated Reading Time:10 minutes, 0 seconds

YOUR PRIME TIME IN ACTION

After my project found its legs around the timeTED published my interview, more folks wanted to chat with me about productivity. In almost every instance, I was asked what my typical day looked like. At first, I didn’t expect to get that question that often, but once I did, it made total sense: I had been experimenting with my dailyroutine for about a decade until I settled on the one that was the most productive for me.*1

After experimenting with quite a few routines over the course of my project—including my wretched one of waking up at 5:30 every morning—I settled into one that let me accomplish the most:*2

•6:30–7 a.m.: Wake upnaturally.

•7 a.m.–9 a.m.: Eat breakfast, work out, meditate, shower.

•9 a.m.–1 p.m.: Write.

•1 p.m.–3 p.m.: Break.

•3 p.m.–8 p.m.: Read, conduct/participate in interviews and meetings.

•8 p.m.–11 p.m.: Leisuretime, bed.

Although this routine is pretty simple on the surface, a lot of consideration stands behind it.

Tracking your time and energy levels for a few weeks is admittedly a pain in the ass—especially when you cut out caffeine,alcohol, andsugar during the process—but the insights that the challenge I suggest inChapter 4will give you are incredible and will last decades. If you absolutely cannot stomach the experiment, at the very least set an hourly chime on your phone, and observe how your energy levels fluctuate over the day.

After I finished up my meditation experiment, I realized I mainly had three high-impact tasks that produced the most value for my project: writing articles, conducting productivity experiments, and reading about and researching productivity.

The best time of day by far to work on your highest-impact tasks is during your Biological Prime Time. The reason for this goes without saying: during your BPT, you bring at least double the energy and focus to whatever it is you’re working on. When you work on your highest-impact tasks during your prime time, you complete them faster, get more engrossed in them, do a noticeably better job on them, work on them with more resilience, and begin to work smarter instead of just harder.

My BPT is between 10 to noon and 5 to 8 p.m., and every day during the project I predominately did two things with that time: wrote articles for my site and researched productivity. I designed some productivity experiments to simply exist in the background as I worked (like using my smartphone for an hour a day), and others to be my main focus for a week or two (like my meditation experiment). Whenever I was conducting one, I integrated the experiment into my schedule, too.

After calculating when I had the most energy, I made sure to blockoff my BPT in mycalendar every day, not only to set that time aside for high-impact tasks, but also to keep that time open in case another vital task came my way. Whenever I interviewed a productivity expert, had an important interview myself, gave a talk, hunkered down on one of my threedaily tasks, or wanted to bring as much of myself as possible to a commitment that was meaningful, like having dinner with my girlfriend, I did all I could to schedule the event during my prime time.

Though interruptions always come up—no one has perfect control over how they spend their time—I quickly realized that my BPT was worth spending intelligently, and defending religiously.

This connection is simple, but incredibly profound: the more important and meaningful tasks and commitments you schedule during your BPT, the more influential and meaningful your work and life will become.

*1Plus, dailyroutines are “productivity porn” in the purest sense of the term: they’re easy to read, entertaining, and forgettable. Don’t worry: I’ll do my best to make this chapter as practical as possible! Plus, I need to redeem myself for writing about the cosmic origin of time earlier on.

*2My daily routine as I write this a year later is virtually identical.

IN THE MOMENT

You likely already have some days when you effortlessly breeze through your task list, and get more done than on any other day. And you likely also have others where, despite doing everything according to plan, you simply aren’t able to focus or get stuff done. That’s one of the strangest aspects of productivity, and another thing that makes it elusive: some days you’ll do everything right, and yet you won’t have enough energy or focus to do good work.

Quick productivity win:Right now, jump into Outlook,iCal,Google Calendar, or whatever your calendar of choice is, and block off your BPTs for the next several weeks. Make sure you set a reminder thirty and fifteen minutes before your prime time is about to start, and use that as a cue that you’re about to hunker down on one of your most important and highest-impact tasks.

With the daily routine I settled into by the end of my project (and still have today), I would meditate, disconnect from the internet, work deliberately, work out, get enough sleep, and unwind after work. Yet some days the stars would align and I found myself writing thousands of words andreading hundreds of pages, while on others I would sit at my desk staring at a blank screen, with no energy or will or focus to do either.

Knowing your BPT is important, but at the same time, your energy and focus levels will fluctuate in ways you don’t expect. Maybe a coworker will run toStarbucks and pick you up a surprise coffee, or you’ll receive a promotion and feel like you’re unstoppable for the rest of the day. Or maybe your team takes you out for a big birthday lunch, and your energy levels crash for the rest of the afternoon. Regardless of the reason, things happen, and your energy levels and focus aren’t 100 percent predictable.

Yesterday I had my day planned out to a T, but when it came time to quit working for the day, I found that I was on a roll, cranking out a steady stream of words for this book. I didn’t want to stop—so I didn’t. I had more energy than I expected to, so I decided to stay up later, writing late into the night, and sleep in this morning. If you’re up on a roll on a project, with a ton of energy and focus and it’s 10 p.m., whywouldn’tyou work a bit longer to become more productive when you have the flexibility to do so?

On the other hand, if it’s 10 p.m. and you have no energy or focus left, your time would likely be best spent heading to bed early so you can continue working when you have more energy and focus in the morning. This is common sense, of course, but again, common sense isn’t always common action. To work more deliberately, awareness is key. It’s essential that you become aware of your energy levels so you can spend your energy wisely throughout the day. (If having zenlike awareness doesn’t come naturally to you, don’t worry: I dedicate an entire section later in the book to awareness and productivity,this page.)

On days when I find myself having more or less energy than I usually do, I simply write out how much energy (on a scale of 1–10) each of my three daily tasks will take. This makes it easier to adapt what I’m working on to the amount of energy and focus I have at the moment.

As a rule, I try to manage my time as little as possible, and because I take on as few commitments as possible (this page), this lets me adjustas the day goes on. That way I can work on my highest-impact tasks when I have the most energy, and my lowest-impact tasks when I have the least energy.

Over time, I’ve discovered that while most days follow the natural ebbs and flows of my daily energy cycle, many days don’t. On those days, the more I adapt what I’m working on to mesh with my energy levels, the more productive I become.

Managing your time becomes important only after you define what you want to accomplish and understand how much energy and focus you have throughout the day.

Just as your energy levels fluctuate over the course of the day, so does how much attention you have. While I’ve found that how well you can focus rises and falls in tandem with your energy, there are also periods of the day when you have more or less attention to dedicate to your work, such as when fewer people are in the office, or when you find you aren’t interrupted or distracted by a deluge of meetings and phone calls. It’s worth being mindful of how much attention you have throughout the day, particularly if it fluctuates quite a bit, if you have kids at home, or if you have team projects at work.

THE PERFECT AMOUNT OF STRUCTURE

In the productivity project, I had control not only over how long I would work every week but also over how I structured each day. Unlike the more rigid nine-to-five jobs I worked, in my project I was free to schedule my days however I wanted, as well as experiment with how the structure made me more or less productive.

As with the number of hours you work, there is a zone where your day has the perfectbalance of structure and free time, where you have enough structure to guide you to being productive, but not so much structure that your day feels rigid and out of your control.

According toPaul Graham, who cofounded theventure capital firmY Combinator, people in the knowledge economy have two types ofschedules: a “maker’s” schedule and a “manager’s” schedule. As Paul put it in an article on his blog, “[t]he manager’s schedule is for bosses. It’s embodied in the traditional appointment book, with each day cut into one-hour intervals.You can block off several hours for a single task if you need to, but by default you change what you’re doing every hour.” The manager’s schedule is mostly made up of meetings, appointments, calls, and email. But if you’re a maker, the opposite is true—your days are naturally far less structured because you don’t have people or projects to manage.

Asking yourself whether you’re a maker or manager will show you your baseline; that is, the amount of structure that you should come to expect based on the nature of your job. You may fall somewhere in between; during my project I both created a lot of content and had a lot of meetings, so I kept a maker’s schedule in the morning and scheduled all my meetings and interviews in the afternoon around my BPT. Knowing where you sit will help you discover how essential time management is in your work, and how much structure you should expect to have each day.

Regardless of whether you’re a maker or manager, some structure is essential. Structure helps you accommodate for your BPT, guides you to work on what you intend to accomplish, and helps you nurture your attention and your energy so you can run on a full tank throughout the day. But beyond accounting for your prime time, intentions, and nature of your job, any additional structure will tend to make your day more rigid and will make you feel less in control of your day. And the more structure you have, the more difficult it becomes to adapt to how you work throughout the day.

The same holds true for structuring your downtime and weekends.It might sound counterintuitive (and not very fun) to structure your time away from work, but research says that doing so makes you more focused, creative, active, motivated, happy, involved in what you’re doing, and a lot more likely to achieve “flow,” that magicalstate where time seems to pass so quickly it’s as if it doesn’t exist at all. I don’t believe in strictly structuring work or free time (where’s the fun in that?), but some structure is helpful. For example, during my project I discovered that I always had more energy when I sat down and created a rough schedule of how I was going to spend my time over the weekend, even if that included scheduling time for putting my feet up and doing nothing at all.

Time required:5 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:4/10

Value:8/10

Fun:7/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll get your highest-impact and most important daily tasks done more efficiently, because you’ll work on them when you actually have the most energy—instead of when they become urgent or feel more important.

One of the most powerful ways I found to get more done in less time in my year of experimentation has been to manage my time as little as possible, and strategically work on tasks when I have the most energy and focus—both of which roughly rise and fall in tandem with each other over the course of the day.

Planning out how you’ll work only takes five minutes of planning at the start of the day, but you’ll make that time back tenfold.

Tomorrow, try letting your Biological Prime Time and energy levels dictate what you work on.*Here are a few extra pointers that you may find helpful:

•During your BPT, schedule time in yourcalendar to work on your three most important tasks—particularly the ones that require the most energy and focus.

•Be defensive of your BPT—that time is yours to use to be crazy productive.

•Block off your BPT in your calendar so no one books you during that time, to remind yourself when it’s time to hunker down, and to keep that time open for the high-impact tasks and projects that will come your way.

•Adapt on the fly. While your BPT shows you how your energy fluctuates over the average day, you’re bound to have some days that are outliers, too, days when you have higher or lower amounts of energy. Run with it. Don’t be afraid to shake up what you’re working on when you find yourself having more or less energy than usual.

•If you’re on a maker’s schedule, chunk your meetings and appointments together so when you switch gears, you can tackle them all at once.

Your productivity per hour will not be consistent—it hinges on how much energy and attention you have. Just as not all tasks are created equal, not all hours of the day are created equal.

Some time management is inevitable, but you’ll accomplish a lot more when you work on your most meaningful tasks when you have the most energy—not when you have the most time.

Your prime time is sacred; use it wisely.

*I’ve personally disabled the clock on my computer. My calendar notifies me when it’s time to switch modes before meetings start so I can prep for them, and I always review my day when I plan out what I want to accomplish.

CLEANING HOUSE

Takeaway:Gathering yourmaintenance tasks together and tackling them all at once is the perfect antidote to being a perfectionist about the wrong things. Nonetheless, maintenance tasks, or Maintenance Days, are essential if you want to have a life that’s healthy and productive.

Estimated Reading Time:8 minutes, 8 seconds

THE WORST KIND OF TASK

For years I’ve been fed up with maintenance tasks—tasks like watering your plants, clearing out your inbox, cutting your nails, sorting through mail,preparing lunches, and buying groceries. Maintenance tasks are essential, because they support your personal life and work, but minute for minute they provide you an abysmal return compared to your most important and meaningful tasks.

Because maintenance tasks are an essential part of life, they’re usually pretty difficult to shrink, outsource, or eliminate, like the low-return tasks in your work (Part Four). But it’s also impossible to be a functioning member of society when you don’t do basic things like tidy up your house, prepare food, take out the trash, do the dishes, and do the laundry. I think that’s a shame, because these tasks use up a lot of what limited time you have.

But they are essential in supporting what you want to accomplish. It’s hard to eat healthfully when you don’t prepare healthy food; it’s hard to look great if you don’t shave or wash and dry your hair every few days;and it’s hard to feel great about coming home if your house or apartment is a mess.

In one of my weirder experiments during my project, for a week I became a total slob. I ordered takeout for every meal, showered only three times throughout the week, wore sweatpants or pajamas every day, and of course still tried to be as productive as I could within these conditions. In the middle of the experiment, I started to feel terrible as I began to remove as many maintenance tasks as possible from my life. And I realized maintenance tasks are essential if you want to live a healthy, happy, socially engaged, and productive life.

MAINTENANCE DAY

As I first set up my own household when I went away to college, my maintenance tasks began to pile up quickly. Suddenly my laundry wasn’t magically done for me, fresh groceries didn’t appear in the kitchen, and my plants weren’t magically watered once a week. I had a lot more maintenance tasks to do every day. But at the same time I didn’t want to use up what little, valuable time I had every day on tasks that did nothing more for me than help me maintain the life I had.

One Sunday morning, when I was racking my brain about how I could do these newfangled tasks more efficiently, a lightbulb went off: What if instead of doing these menial tasks throughout the week, I lumped them all together and did as many of them as I could at once?

As an experiment, in the week that followed I purposely didn’t tackle my maintenance tasks throughout the week. Instead, I made a list of the ones that popped up, and I tackled them all the next Sunday morning. And it worked. I got more done in less time.

I’ve used the same ritual ever since. I call it my “Maintenance Day.”

My Maintenance Day ritual is incredibly simple, and incredibly powerful:throughout the week, I simply collect all of my low-return maintenance tasks on a list—everything from going grocery shopping to cutting my nails—and instead of doing them throughout the week, I do them all at once.

I finally felt like I was no longer treading water by working on tasksthroughout the week that didn’t move my life forward. And I had much more time, attention, and energy for tasks that were actually important and meaningful throughout the week.

WHAT I DO ON MAINTENANCE DAY

If you’re curious, here’s a complete list of everything I wait to tackle until Sunday morning—all of which takes me, at a leisurely pace, four to six hours:

•Grocery shopping

•Clean house and office

•Create a meal and workout plan

•Trim beard and shave

•Do laundry

•Prepare lunches in Tupperware containers for the week

•Water plants

•Read articles I’ve saved up throughout the week

•Review my projects, and define next steps (this page)

•Review my“Waiting For” list

•Define three outcomes for the week ahead (this page)

•Clear out all my inboxes (this page)

•Review my hot spots (this page)

•Review myAccomplishments List

Naturally, your own Maintenance Day ritual will vary. If you have kids, for example, it probably isn’t realistic to only clean up around the house on Sunday morning. But perhaps you can relegate cleaning to two or three days a week, leaving the majority of your days free for high-priority tasks. Regardless of your lifestyle—whether you’re a bachelor entrepreneur or an office worker with a family—you undoubtedly have maintenance tasks that you can chunk together and tackle all at once.

Your maintenance tasks, by their very nature, have to be kept up with. You can’t always shrink, delegate, outsource, or eliminate them the way you can other low-return tasks, but you do have control overwhenyou do them. By chunking them together and changing up when you work on maintenance tasks, you create the space to focus on bigger things throughout the week.

If scheduling a Maintenance Day is simply too unrealistic for you,try gathering a list of the maintenance tasks you do throughout the week and create a maintenancelist. This will help you chunk together some of your maintenance tasks so you can get many of them out of the way when you are low on energy and can’t focus on more impactful or meaningful tasks.

Here’s the curious thing about maintenance tasks: although they require a good amount of time to complete, most of them usealmost noneof your focused energy or attention. In fact, you can do most of your maintenance tasks automatically, without much thought.

While multitasking will make you less productive as you try to focus on two things that require a lot of attention, it’s possible to multitask and become more productive with maintenance tasks simply because they require almost none of your attention and your energy. When you do maintenance tasks, you have attention and energy to spare.

Here are my favorite ways to use my time wisely when undertaking the tasks on my Maintenance Day list:

•Do them with someone else, like my girlfriend, to make the tasks more interesting and meaningful.

•Listen to a podcast or audiobook while completing them. I plow through so many tasks on my Maintenance Day, I can usually get through half of a book by the time I’m finished.

•Call someone orSkype someone so you can have a meaningful conversation while doing the tasks.

•Do the tasks mindfully to work out my “attention muscle” (this page).

•Deliberately think about nothing while doing maintenance tasks, to give my mind a chance to rest and wander (this page).

Want to accomplish more while completing your Maintenance Day tasks? The possibilities are endless; you can download a podcast to learn a new language, or plan for a vacation, do body weight exercises, or practice a new skill.

Although it’s not possible to eliminate all the pesky maintenance tasks from your life, it is possible to spend your time on them much more intelligently and fruitfully.

Try setting a time limit for how long you’ll work on your maintenance tasks, to get more done in less time. Just make sure you don’t work on them during your BPT—that time is sacred.

STRIVING FOR IMPERFECTION

In the years following my first Maintenance Day ritual, I’ve noticed a ton of benefits that extend beyond having moretime for important and meaningful tasks throughout the week. Having a Maintenance Day helps you eliminate both physical and mental clutter, so you can approach each new week with more clarity and energy. Plus, it feels freaking amazing to accomplish ten or fifteen things at once, and check them off your to-do list.

Over time, one of the biggest hidden benefits I’ve realized is that it causes me to waste less time. By their very nature, maintenance tasks shouldn’t be done to perfection. They are low return. They support your work, but they aren’t as essential as the high-return and meaningful tasks they support.

Many people—myself included—are perfectionists. We have the tendency to continue to work on tasks beyond the point where they’re “good enough,” where the return on investing more time into them diminishes rapidly. Picasso spent a lifetime mastering the art of painting; every small improvement made his work that much richer.

But low-return maintenance tasks don’t offer the same return on investment. Past a certain point, overattending to more menial tasks simply cuts into time you would have otherwise spent on more meaningful or higher-return activities.

Lumping together your maintenance tasks—whether on a Maintenance Day or with a maintenance list—helps you eliminate spending too much time on them. And it gives you fewer lower-return tasks to waste time on throughout the week, which gives you the time to focus on what’s actually important.

There is a time and a place for perfection—but your maintenance tasks aren’t it. The extra time you spend on them is simply wasted. You can always make your house 10 percent cleaner, but does anyone really care?

Chunking your maintenance tasks together is the perfect antidote to being a perfectionist about the wrong things.

THE END OF TIME MANAGEMENT

In a book about productivity, it may seem strange that I’ve only dedicated three chapters to time-management techniques. But, as I’ve discussed, time management simply isn’t as important in the knowledge economy as it was in thetime economy.

In the knowledge economy, the most productive people see time as the backdrop against which they work. Some coordination is essential for managing your time around the work of other people, and for working smarter instead of harder. But whenever possible, the most productive people let time management take the backseat to how they manage their energy and attention. It used to be that time was the only resource we had to manage. Today, your time, attention, and energy are more interconnected than they ever have been, and the most productive people manage all three.

Time management is impossible. It’s possible to manage when you work on things. You can’t manage or control time—it’s been ticking on for 13.8 billion years, and it shows no signs of stopping.

Time required:10 minutes throughout the week; a few hours for the ritual, depending on how many tasks you chunk together

Energy/Focus Required:2/10

Value:7/10

Fun:8/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll carve out more attention and energy to work on important things throughout the week. You’ll also procrastinate less, experience more mental clarity, and feel great when you tackle a dozen of your maintenance tasks at once.

Establishing a Maintenance Day ritual is one of the most powerful things you can do to free up attention and energy throughout the week.

Here’s the challenge for this chapter: next week, continue to do your maintenance tasks throughout the week, but as you do them, write them down on your Maintenance Day list, if you think you can safely do them later on in the week. (Watering plants, for example, or emptying the kitty litter may not wait.) If you’re like me, you’ll be surprised by how many tasks you don’t have to do throughout the week but can group them together on a Maintenance Day or on a maintenance list.

Then, the next week, schedule a Maintenance Day, or half day, to tackle the tasks all at once. To use that time even more productively, use the spare energy and attention you have during your tasks for something even more important and meaningful, like learning a language, or listening to a favorite NPR podcast. Just make sure you don’t tackle maintenance tasks during your BPT—that time is sacred!

If you’re like me, once you start, you won’t go back.