Part Five

QUIET YOURMIND

EMPTYING YOURBRAIN

Takeaway:Externalizing your tasks and writing them down is a powerful way to free up mental space and get organized. Performing a “brain dump” not only reduces stress and helps you focus, it also motivates you to action.

Estimated Reading Time:16 minutes, 18 seconds

SNOWBALLINGIDEAS

It’s hard to imagine (for me, at least), but there was a time when books, newspapers, and the like didn’t exist—when there wasn’t a way to capture and then spread your ideas to other people.

With the advent of theprinting press around 1440, books became civilization’s first foray into externalizing knowledge and information on a large scale, which allowed humanity as a whole to become more productive. We no longer had to walk around carrying our collective knowledge in our heads. Instead, we could externalize it into a vast collection of books and then build upon those ideas to form newer and better ones.

There were, of course, those who thought this was a terrible thing—at least at first.Long before the printing press was invented,Socrates was averse towriting, arguing that it would destroy our memories and weaken our minds, even going so far as to argue that it was “inhuman.” It’s not uncommon to hear people saying the exact same thing today aboutWikipedia andGoogle. But as powerful as our brains are, the latest neurological research shows that our brains are terrible at consciouslyprocessing more than a few thoughts at once.At best, our minds can only consciously hold on to a fewideas at one time—whether those include things we have to get done, emails we’re remembering to send, or things we’re waiting on. To summarize decades’ worth of complex neurological research in one sentence, our brains are built for solving problems, connecting dots, and forming new ideas—not for holding on to information that we can simply externalize.

Here are a few examples:

•We can externalize tasks we have to do by putting them on a to-dolist, so they don’t take up space in our short-term memory or make us feel overwhelmed.

•We can put appointments and meetings in ourcalendar so we don’t have to worry about them, and so we’re reminded about them when the time is right.

•We can externalize things like our shopping list, so we don’t forget half of what we need to buy the next time we’re at the store, or realize when we’re hunkering down on something important that we forgot to buy cantaloupe.

Just as the first books didn’t weaken our minds, getting tasks, appointments, and information out of your head won’t make your mind empty. It actually does the opposite by giving you more mental bandwidth. It frees up space so your brain can do what it’s built for: forming new thoughts, ideas, and connections, and once you capture them all, snowballing them forward.

Your mind is an insanely powerful thinking machine, but it’s the wrong place to store everything you have to get done, because it’s simply not built for that purpose.

The more you get out of your head, the more clearly you’ll think.

MY FIRST BRAIN DUMP

The very first productivity book I bought, about a decade ago, wasDavid Allen’sGetting Things Done(GTD). The premise of this book lies on thesame principle: that your mind is not the best place to store everything you have to get done. Allen pioneered a system for getting all your tasks and projects out of your head into an external system—incredibly, before a wealth of research came out over the following decade that validated how powerful getting unresolved open loops outside of your head can be. As David Allen told me, “Your head is not for holding ideas—it’s for having ideas.”

I can hardly remember what I had for breakfast this morning, let alone the productivity books I read back in high school—but luckily some memories stick with me to this day. My first brain dump was one of them.

If you’ve ever created a to-do list, you’re probably familiar with how great it feels to get everything you have to do out of your head. When I first cracked openGetting Things Done, this was one of the first activities David’s canonical productivity book got me to do—but taken up several notches. I was in high school at the time so I didn’t have nearly as many responsibilities and commitments as I do now, but per the book’s suggestion, I sat down with just a pen and anotepad and listed every single thing that I had to get done that was floating around in my head. I still remember being stunned by how much I had on my plate; during my first brain dump, I captured probably about one hundred to-dos, projects I was in the middle of, things that slipped through the cracks that I had forgotten about, and more—all that I was storing in my head that I hadn’t given the time or space to rise to the surface. Anything that was weighing on my mind, even slightly, I detailed in my notepad.

As Allen explains, “The first thing to do is to capture what’s got your attention, then decide if it’s actionable or not, and if it is, decide what the next action on it is, and do the action right then if you can.”

The feeling I had after was, to put it very mildly, liberating: I felt as though a weight had been lifted from my shoulders.

My mind was finally clear.

As Allen writes in his book, “any ‘would, could, should’ commitment held only in the psyche creates irrational and unresolvable pressure, 24-7.”

“What you need to do is take all of those things and one at a time,discipline yourself and ask yourself: is this something I’m actually going to do something about?” he explains. “If yes, then what’s the very next thing you need to do to move that forward? That decision doesn’t necessarily show up by itself. You have to think to decide what the next step is, whether it’s to surf the web, make a phone call, draft a document on your computer. That granularity—getting it down to the next physical, visible action, is a really powerful thing to do.”

This is a result of whatBluma Zeigarnik named the“Zeigarnik effect” in the late 1920s: incomplete or interrupted tasks weigh on our mind much more than completed tasks. After emptying my mind of everything that was weighing on it, I came to realize just how true this was as I experienced more space and clarity and felt less stress than I ever had before. My mind felt liberated—though it’s worth noting that at this point I hadn’t yet discovered girls, whiskey, or cosmology.

INCOMING!

But not only did David’s book guide me to externalize the tasks in my head during that first mind dump, it also taught me how important it was to constantly capture tasks as they came up, especially if I wanted to maintain a clear mind. It’s one thing to get every unresolved commitment you have out of your head and onto a task list, but fending off low-return tasks lets you maintain that clear mental space.

From then on, whenever I came up with an unrealized idea or thought, I added it in the notepad I carried around with me everywhere I went—which over time evolved into a smartphone. Whenever I thought of something to pick up at the store, I would write it down before the thought escaped me. And if I noticed even the smallest item weighing on my psyche, I would externalize it to create more attentional space for bigger and better things.

If that sounds obsessive, that’s because it is. But except for meditation, nothing has helped me think more clearly.

Ten years later, almost every thought I have is new, because I make a note of anything important right away so I can deal with it or build on it later. Anyone can, and should, do the same. You’ll be stunned athow many tasks, projects, and commitments you’re keeping up there, and how clear your head will feel once you gather it all in one place. Your brain is much better at focusing on the task at hand when you have a clear mind.

THE SYSTEM I LOVE

Of course, merely making note of the tasks and projects on your plate isn’t enough. If you don’t do anything with what you’ve captured afterward, you won’t clear up any mental space, because you’ll go right back to stressing about what you still have to get done.

Over the last decade or so, and especially during my project, I experimented with using dozens of to-do list and task-management apps that deal with the tasks and projects I’ve captured, and although many of them have worked well, there isn’t one I’d recommend above the others. In my experience, it doesn’t matter how you organize your tasks and projects, as long as you find it helpful and user-friendly.

Today, I have a relatively simple way of capturing and organizing everything I have to get done. Throughout the day, as tasks,ideas, and other open loops grab at my attention, I put them in the notes app of whatever device is in front of me. (The notes app I use syncs between all my devices.) And every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, after I check my email, I go through the notes I’ve compiled and add them to my to-do list orcalendar.

My to-do list also couldn’t be simpler: it’s another note that I’ve pinned to the top of my list of notes that contains my three daily and weekly intentions at the top, and my task list underneath. I also maintain a calendar in which I try to schedule as little as possible.

After experimenting with every task-management app under the sun, the workflow I’ve fallen into is simple. Since my app syncs my notes between my devices, it’s mindlessly easy to collect tasks, thoughts, and ideas whenever and wherever they come to me. When I’m away from my devices—like after my 8 p.m. shutoff ritual—I just carry a small pen and notepad around in my pocket. While the apps and devices I use change frequently, I also often revert back to using paper.

Regardless of how I’ve organized everything, though, my basic workflow of capturing and then organizing the tasks on my plate has stayed the same for years, and the process has become seamless.

HOW TO ORGANIZE IT ALL

Because everyone’s way of working is different, I won’t recommend a specificorganizational tool. It isn’t about which method of organizing your tasks is best, but what’s best for you. A large percentage of the most productive people I know use a pen and paper, and it’s important to not discount this option. But if you’re looking for a system, it’s worth looking for something similar to what I’ve settled into, something that’s almost invisible to you because it integrates so well with the way you work. It should also let you easily view, manage, and prioritize everything you have to get done, so that you can effortlessly pull together ideas, events, tasks, and projects.

As I experimented with corralling the open loops from my head, I discovered a number of other things that, in addition to to-dos and calendar events, are worth capturing. Two of these are straight out ofGetting Things Done—a “Waiting For” list and “Projects” notes—and the rest are ideas I’ve experimented with myself with a lot of success.

Here are the best tools I’ve discovered to help you organize and deal with all your tasks and projects.

A “Waiting For” List

My absolute favorite golden nugget out ofGetting Things Done, apart from the power of externalizing what’s in your head, is the “Waiting For” list. I like to think of the Waiting For list as your to-do list’s sexy, secret lover. It’s pretty much what it sounds like: a list of everything you’re waiting on, which—like a to-do list—you review on a regular basis to make sure nothing slips through the cracks.

Right now, I can say with near certainty that you’re waiting on several things you’re simply storing in your head, things that may slip through the cracks if you don’t follow up on them. On a given week, my Waiting For list contains everything from packages I’m waiting for fromAmazon, to important email responses I’m expecting, to money I’m owed, to important calls and letters I’m waiting for. I put pretty much everything on my list.

Because I schedule time to review my list three times a week (during myproject, I also began to review my Waiting For list after I checked for new email), over the last several years, after I settled into a habit of capturing the things I have been waiting for, nothing has slipped through the cracks, and I worry way less about everything I have to manage. Once you capture something, you can immediately stop worrying about it. I also keep my Waiting For list in my notes app so everything is in one place, and group the items on the list by their context (i.e., Home, Owed, Email, Phone, etc.).

Another great way to capture what you’re waiting for:After you send important emails that need responses, drag the message into a Waiting For folder. This also helps you catch any important email responses that might land in your Spam folder.

INDIVIDUAL PROJECT NOTES

Keeping separate notes about “Projects” is another golden nugget I love fromGetting Things Done. While a simple task—like picking up a few things from the store after work—is a one-off thing, a project is anything that requires more than a few simple steps to complete and has an end or due date. In my notes app, I also keep a separate note for each project I’m tackling.

Right now, I have individual notes for trips I’m planning, speaking engagements I’m prepping for, and even one for writing this book. Every project note contains information about each project that I need to keep in mind to move the projects forward, and most important, the very next actions I need to take with each project. Having a separate note foreach project not only lets me externalize the projects I’m in the middle of, but it also lets me logically plan out the next steps I need to take to move each project forward. The titles of all my project notes start with “PRO,” so they’re all in one place when I scroll through my list of notes in alphabetical order.

Every Maintenance Day, I scan through my lists of projects to define their next steps, and pull to-dos from them to add to my task list and the intentions I set for the week. Because of this, even though I’m often taking on dozens of projects at one time, I hardly ever think about them because I know that past Chris has taken care of things and captured everything that present Chris (and future Chris) needs to deal with at the start of every week.

A lot of projects take more attention than they do time; for example, if you have to give a thirty-minute presentation, even though it’s only half an hour, if you’re like me you’ll spend hours thinking andworrying about the talk leading up to when you give it. Externalizing your projects helps you get them out of your head so you can move them forward every week, and when you’re not planning, focus on what’s in front of you.

A Worry List

One afternoon, between finishing university and starting my yearlong productivity project, I had a lot on mymind, worrying about everything from whether I should accept a full-time job or startAYOP, to what I was going to do for health insurance after graduating, to what my living situation would be. I created a project note for each decision (with next actions clearly defined), but I still couldn’t stop worrying about them. So I externalized the very act ofworrying.

To reclaim more attentional space, I made a list of everything I was worrying about—most of which I was blowing out of proportion, of course—and scheduled an hour every day to think through everything on the list. If I caught myself worrying about something throughout the day, I reminded myself that I had scheduled time to worry later, and if I started worrying about a new thing during the day, I captured it on the list so I could worry about it later, as well.

Most of the time I don’t need this list, but if I ever feel like things are spiraling out of my control and want to clear some headspace, I create a list to clear my head.

An Inbox Review

When you look around, you quickly realize just how many “inboxes” you have.

I define an inbox as any place where you store the expectations other people have of you (such as responding to emails, tweets, Facebook messages, voicemails,LinkedIn invites, physical letters), or any place you store the expectations you have for yourself (such as listening to podcasts, sorting the papers on your desk, or going through research you’ve bookmarked). I’m a completionist at heart and like to stay on top of the messages people send me. But like many people, the number of inboxes I’ve built up over time is overwhelming.

That’s why, on Maintenance Days, I completely review and empty all my inboxes that accumulate items over the course of the week. I also make sure to clear out the ideas and tasks I accumulated over the weekend in my notes app.

Potpourri

If you want to dive even further into externalizing the open loops in your head, here are a few more of my favorite ways to do so:

•Notepads Everywhere:I love capturing ideas as they come to me, but because I shut my phone off between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m., it’s not always possible to capture them on my phone. For that reason I keep physical notepadseverywhere. I keep a showerproofAquaNotes notepad in the shower for when ideas bubble up in the shower. I keep a notepad on my bedside table with a light-up pen (designed to be used by pilots) to write down any ideas that come up as I fall asleep or wake up. And when I head out without my phone, I carry around a notepad in my pocket to jot down ideasthat come up. Ideas, tasks, and insights only have value when you capture and then act on them. Keeping notepads everywhere has helped me hold on to a ton of them.

•Simpler Passwords:Passwords are a pain to remember. I’ve solved this two ways: I have apassword manager that stores all my passwords andfills them in automatically (I recommend either 1Password or LastPass). I also have a simple system for coming up with new passwords: my password for every website and service is simply the name of the website, but instead of typing the name of the website, I type the letter to the left of each letter of the website on my keyboard (“Google” turns into “Fiifkw”) and then tack on a unique series of letters, numbers, and symbols at the end that are the same with every password (“8S5x8” to make “Fiifkw8S5x8”). This makes every password unique, impossible to guess, and best of all, impossible to forget.

•Filing Emails:Some things aren’t worth keeping in your head—and that includes where you keep archived emails. A recent study byIBM compared email users who stored emails in folders and users who archived emails and searched for them later. On average, it took participants 66.07 seconds to search for an email, and72.87 secondsto find an email in a folder—and these times didn’t take into account the time users spent sorting their email into folders in the first place! It’s not worth your time or attention to file and retrieve emails.Search for them instead.

TAKING PRODUCTIVITY TOO FAR

Since being inspired byGetting Things Donea decade ago, I’ve found that there is a line that’s relatively easy to cross, after which you begin to spend too much time managing and planning what you have to do instead of getting real work done. Working more deliberately is at the heart of productivity, but it’s possible to take the idea too far. This isa trap I think a lot of people fall into when they become interested in productivity—and I include myself in this group.

From what I’ve found, the most productive people are the ones who strike a balance between the two extremes, who understand the power of capturing and organizing what they have to get done, but who also don’t sacrifice real work in favor of being productive about productivity.

Research shows that the simple act of making a to-do list makes you less likely to get work done, because creating a task listsimulatesgetting actual work done, even though it doesn’t lead you to accomplish anything. To carve out more attentional space, I think it’s crucial that you perform a brain dump of everything on your plate and capture open loops as they grab at your attention throughout the day. But it’s also important you’re mindful that you don’t take things too far. Just because you feel productive doesn’t mean you actually are—and this is something to keep in mind as you round up and organize everything on your plate.

Getting Things Donesits proudly on my bookshelf to this day, turned to face outward while only the spines of the other books I’ve acquired are exposed. I think it speaks volumes that over the last decade the system has become so integrated into the tapestry of my work and life that I don’t notice that I’m practicing it.

That being said, I’ve never adopted it in its entirety. The system is pretty complex, and it’s too easy to take it too far. To his credit, David has said many times that the crucial part about theGetting Things Donemethodology isn’t that you follow it to a T; it’s that you externalize and organize everything you have to get done. You can take the parts that work for you, and leave the rest.

“Give yourself a couple of hours and literally grab every single thing that has your attention,” he told me. “You don’t have to go very far—just start to notice what has your attention.”

The pros of externalizing everything on your plate outweigh the cons by a massive margin, but it’s important to be mindful that you don’t take this tactic—or any other tactic in this book—to the extreme. Productivity techniques exist to help you work smarter. But they’re only useful when you still do the work.

Time required:20–30 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:9/10

Value:9/10

Fun:9.5/10

What you’ll get out of it:Even though it might not look like it on the surface, this is perhaps the most fun and freeing challenge in the book. You’ll clear up an incredible amount of attentional space to focus on important things throughout the day and become able to totally invest yourself in your work, feeling much calmer and confident that you’re on top of your work and that nothing will slip through the cracks.

One of the biggest lessons I learned from my project, especially when it came to making changes to the way I lived and worked, was that the smaller the change I tried to make, the more likely I was to succeed at making it. Smaller changes are also far less intimidating, which makes them more likely to actually stick. This is why so many of these challenges are on the smaller side: not only does that make you more likely to actually do them, but after you do them, they’re more likely to remain and help you become more productive. If you create a workout habit, and allow yourself to only work out for five minutes a day, you’re going to be dying to do more by the end of the week.

This holds particularly true with externalizing the tasks, projects, and other open loops in your head. The value ofcapturing everything in your mind is immense, but it’s also easy to dive in too deep and get discouraged, or dive in too deep and take things too far.

My challenge for you is to perform the brain dump ritual, the same ritual that got me hooked on productivity. Shut off all your devices, and sit down with only a notepad and a pen; capture everything in your mind that bubbles up to the surface and grabs at your attention, whether it includes tasks or projects you have to get done, thingsyou’re worrying about, things that have slipped through the cracks, or things you’re waiting for.

Once you write down everything that is drawing your attention, I think you’ll want to start managing everything in an external system—if only to make the good feeling last.

RISING UP

Takeaway:Doing a weeklyreview of your tasks and accomplishments not only gives you a betterperspective on your wins and the areas you need to improve, it also gives you morecontrol over your life. Adding in “hot spots” is a powerful addition to this technique that will keep you on the right path.

Estimated Reading Time:9 minutes, 37 seconds

RISING UP

After I began to capture the tasks, projects, and concerns in my head, I found another unanticipated benefit.

InGetting Things Done, there is an important “Weekly Review” ritual, where you look over everything you’ve captured and organized throughout the week—including your projects, Waiting For list, and more. Seeing all your tasks, projects, and commitments from a bird’s-eye view is exhilarating, not only because it lets you plan for the week ahead and make sure nothing slips through the cracks, but also because it gives you a new perspective on your life.

Whenever I scrolled through my list of tasks and projects, and everything else, I felt like I was in an airplane seeing the city I lived in quickly shrink beneath my feet. The tasks I was in the middle of—the cars on the streets below—became insects. I could see how much I was trying to do at once, and how much space I had carved out between them. The projects I was tackling—the buildings and parking garages below—alsoshrank, and I could see how they fit together to make up the bigger picture of my life. And I could begin to think about the commitments I was taking on—the neighborhoods that the cars and buildings were placed in. It’s crucial to rise up above your daily life every once in a while so you can see it from a new, more distanced perspective. And doing so lets you adjust course and make changes if you need to.

But it’s possible to rise up even higher, and this is where the simple idea of “hot spots” comes in.

PRODUCTIVITY AND CONTROL

What attracts a lot of folks to productivity books is their promise to help them regain control over everything they have to get done.

I love feeling in control over what I’m responsible for. Every task, project, and open loop I cleared from my conscience gave me a bit more attention to focus on the task at hand, which gave me more control over my work, which let me become more productive.

Today, even though I have more to do than ever before, I have more control over my work than ever before.

When you step back and regain control over your work, you can work smarter, more deliberately, and with more purpose, which makes it infinitely easier to become more productive.

The tactics I’ve written about so far have helped me reclaim an incredible amount of time and attention—which has given me more time, attention, and energy to spend on what’s actually important.

But of all the tactics we’ve discussed so far, no tactic will help you feel more in control of your life than this one. Externalizing your tasks and projects helps you focus more, worry less, and snowball your ideas and projects forward—but believe it or not, you can take things up yet another notch or two and feel even more in control over your work and life after you capture your tasks and projects.

“Hot spots” is a fancy name for a very simple idea—an idea that let me feel more in control of my work than I ever had before. Hot spots let you see your work and life from ten thousand feet.

YOUR LIFE, BOILED DOWN TO ONE LIST

During my productivity project, I discovered something interesting about the different techniques that are supposed to help you organize or take control of your life: most of them aren’t worth your time.

I think the return on any productivity method has to behuge, because for every minute you invest in your productivity, you lose one minute of doing actual work.

Luckily, hot spots fit the bill.

Your hot spots are the portfolio of your life. From a very high level, all your tasks, projects, and commitments can be categorized into one of seven basic “hot spots,” a term thatJ. D. Meier coined.

According to J.D., we have seven areas in which we invest our time (and attention and energy) every day:

•Mind

•Body

•Emotions

•Career

•Finances

•Relationships

•Fun

Ninety percent of the people I’ve met fit their commitments into these seven life areas, even if they call them something else, such as Home, orSpiritual. What you name your hot spots doesn’t matter as much as having a list of very high-level life areas that fit everything you’re responsible for.

A simple list of your seven hot spots, of course, isn’t all that powerful. But when you expand the areas—to list all the commitments you have in each part of your life—the list springs to life. For example, on my list of hot spots, I have expanded my “Mind” hot spot to hold all the commitments and responsibilities that fall under the heading the Mind:

•Learning (books, Instapaper, podcasts, audiobooks, RSS feeds)

•Meditation

•Reading

•Music

•Mindfulness

•Slowing down and working more deliberately

•Making more attentional space between work and life elements

•Stress relief (meditation, reading, listening to music)

The basic idea behind the technique is that once a week you review your list of hot spots, to think about how much time you spent in each one during the previous week, and to think about what to focus on and think about in the week ahead.

It took me a few weeks to collect all the commitments and responsibilities that I had under each hot spot, but once I did, I could look at the list and see my life expanded right there in front of me.

I would see “dental” under my Body hot spot, remember that I hadn’t been to the dentist in a while, and book an appointment. I would see “my parents” listed under my Relationships hot spot, and remember to give them a call the next week. I would see “separating from work on weekends” under Fun, and realize that I had been working too hard. And I would see “mindfulness” under my Mind hot spot, and make an effort to be more mindful in the week ahead. Week after week, I collected tasks that would have otherwise fallen through the cracks and scheduled them the very next week.

Every week, as I pored over the list and thought a little about each item and what I needed to change in the week ahead, and evaluated how I did the previous week, I rose up above my tasks, projects, and commitments, as if I could see my life from ten thousand feet.

And best of all, I set the course for the week ahead.

TILTING

It’s pretty much impossible to act deliberately 100 percent of the time. This is what makes productivity more of an art than a science.

After reflecting on my first log, I noticed how hard I was on myself because I could have been so much more productive than I was. But as I discovered through my interviews and experiments, no one acts deliberately or productively all the time.

What separates the most productive people from everyone else is that they make course corrections every week to gradually get better at everything they do.

And creating an expanded list of my life’s hot spots is the best tool I’ve found to make course corrections every week. Every Maintenance Day, I look through the expanded areas of my life and ask myself a few questions—some from J.D., and some that I discovered during my year of productivity:

•What do I need to spend more time on next week?

•What did I spend too much time on last week?

•What do I need to schedule or do next week?

•What do I have to be mindful of next week?

•What are some unresolved issues I’m having in each area?

•What opportunities do I have in each of my hot spots next week?

•Whatobstacles will get in the way of my goals next week?

•Am I going in the right direction with all my commitments?

•Are there any commitments I need to add or remove? Expand or shrink?

•What did I knock out of the park last week?

To this day, this reflection helps me make course corrections and act more in accordance with my values and goals every week—without getting in my way too much.

While no one acts in accordance with their values all the time, the most productive people act in accordance with their values in the long run—and they do this by regularly making course corrections and finding what they need to improve on week after week. Even though in the short run, crises erupt and unimportant things eat into your time and attention, when you deliberately make adjustments every week, in the long run you will be able to act in accordance with what you care about.

I think the most productive people also spend some time thinking about which of their hot spots are the most important in their lives, and whether they need to “tilt” in the short run to focus on one more than the others. It’s like spending more time on your career early on in adult life to ensure your advancement and give yourself the resources you can use later for other things. In my case, I “tilted” toward my Career hot spot by pouring a ton of time, attention, and energy into my year of productivity project, because I knew the long-term return on the work I did would be worth it.

Another great part about keeping a list of hot spots is that if one hot spot goes to hell, it doesn’t take down your entire portfolio. For example, if you lose your job, the strengths of your Relationships, Finances, and Emotions hot spots will help to sustain you until you find another one.

Looking over my list of hot spots has become one of my favorite weekly rituals; nothing has helped me work and live more deliberately.

LAST LIST, I PROMISE

Scanning through your list of hot spots is a powerful ritual, but I found one additional cool use for the list.

The thing about your scannable list of hot spots is that it’s relatively static. You’ll never stop having commitments like visiting the dentist, phoning your parents, remembering to disconnect, or being mindful. But whatdoeschange on a weekly basis is what projects you take on—the elements of your work and life that have natural start and end dates and require more than a few simple steps to complete.

For years I had been keeping separate notes for the projects I was tackling so I could externalize them—but I had never created amaster list of them all. There are hundreds of apps programmed around theGetting Things Donemethodology that would have let me do this, but again, none of them stuck because so many of them got in the way of me actually doing good work.

Then I came up with the simple idea of creating a master list of my projects, with the projects grouped under each of my hot spots. (There’s a sentence that would make zero sense if you flipped the book open tothis page.) Much like creating a scannable list of hot spots, this list is refreshingly simple—but also amazingly powerful.

Under my Finances hot spot on this list I keep projects like:

•Pay off student loan.

•Do taxes.

•Spend less money on eating out and delivery.

•Create a budget for next year.

•Save up for a vacation in Ireland.

Just as my hot spot list lets me fly above my life, my master projects list, once I filled it out, quickly let me fly above all the work I had in progress, as well as every change I was trying to make in each area of my life. It also let me jog my memory for the projects I needed to focus on in the week ahead, as well as areas where I needed to improve. Keeping this list continually updated takes time, but I use my master projects list every week to rise above the areas of my life and think about the value of the projects I’m in the middle of, as well as other valuable projects I can start to become more productive.

To me, one of the biggest benefits to becoming more productive is having a better grasp of everything you’re trying to do at one time, and the most difficult time to try to make sense of everything is when you’re working at ground level. When you’re working moment to moment, it’s pretty hard to step back from what you’re working on to think about how important it is—this is what makes setting intentions at the beginning of every day and week so important.

The same holds true for how you spend your time in general. When you’re in the thick of things, it’s hard to rise above your life to see what’s important, and what you need to change.

Hot spots are the way to do exactly that.

Time required:10 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:7/10

Value:7/10

Fun:9/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll see your life from a perspective you’ve never had before and be able to reflect on the importance of all the tasks, projects, and commitments you take on.

Once you externalize all the work on your plate, both in your work life and in your personal life, and capture any new tasks that come up, try scrolling through everything you’ve captured. Provided it’s well organized, you should feel an incredible feeling of being able to envision every aspect of your life.

Creating a scannable list of hot spots is my favorite way to take this feeling even further; it’s one of my favorite ways to work smarter instead of harder. After I scan through my projects, I pull tasks from them to adjust course for the week ahead.

When I first sat down to create a scannable list of hot spots, it took me about ten minutes to expand every area of my life; over the next few weeks as new hot spot elements came to me, I captured them in my notes app and added them to the list as I cleared my notes out a few times a week.

In this chapter, I challenge you to do the same. Take ten minutes, and think about the elements in seven areas of your life. If you’ve decided to start a Maintenance Day ritual, review your list at that time, thinking about where you want to improve the next week. When you don’t act completely in accordance with what’s important to you, don’t be too hard on yourself—nobody is perfect. Just adjust course; in the long term, you’ll get the exactbalance you want.

MAKING ROOM

Takeaway:Letting yourmind wander without distraction, such as when you’re in the shower, is beneficial forbrainstorming, problem solving, and becoming more creative.

Estimated Reading Time:9 minutes, 53 seconds

THENEUROLOGY OF A SHOWER

The last time you took a shower, you may have noticed that after a minute or two, something interesting began to happen: your mind started to wander, from what you had to do at work later in the day, to what you’d make for breakfast, to the fact you forgot to buy cantaloupe for that night’s party. And occasionally during your shower, a brilliant idea or insight might even bubble to the surface.

This happens to pretty much everyone.

You may have also noticed that the opposite is the case when you mindlessly surf the internet or use your smartphone. While you may have the oddEurekamoment when you let your mind wander in the shower, chances are you rarely have a brilliant insight while you’re on your smartphone.

There is a curious reason this phenomenon occurs in the shower and not when you use your smartphone: when you shower and let your mind wander, you carve out even more attentional space for yourself, whichcreates room for thoughts, ideas, and insights to bubble up to the surface from your unconscious mind and grab your attention.

Giving your mind the time and space to wander lets you carve out more attentional space, think more deeply about everything on your plate, and as many studies show, help you work smarter instead of just harder.

YOUR BRAIN’S TWO MODES

According to research, our mind seesaws between two modes throughout the day: a “wandering” mode, which we experience when we’re taking a shower, and a “central executive” mode, which we experience when we’re on our smartphones or focused intently on something.

You can’t be in both modes at once, and most experts recommend spending time in both. AsDaniel Levitin writes in his bookThe Organized Mind, “In the see-saw of attention, Western culture overvalues the central executive mode, and undervalues thedaydreaming mode.” And there are differences between the two that make spending time in both worthwhile. “The central executive approach toproblem-solving is often diagnostic, analytic, and impatient, whereas the daydreaming approach is playful, intuitive, and relaxed,” he explains. Some research even shows that your brain’s mind-wandering mode can be beneficial when your work is complex or requires more creativity.

But with each passing year, letting your mind wander may seem to be a bit more difficult. More and more often, we seem to get sucked into using one morelimbic-system stimulating device, like our computers, pads, and smartphones. And while they make us more connected, they can also prevent us from daydreaming, which makes it hard to step back from the decisions we have to make and problems we have to solve.In the average week today, the typical American spends51.8 hoursstaring at screens—that includes time in front of their smartphone, tablet, laptop, desktop computer, and TV—which averages out to 7 hours and 24 minutes ofscreen timeevery day.Assuming that you sleep for 7.7 hours every night (the national average), that means you spend 45 percent of your waking hours staring at shiny rectangulardigital screens. Because your mind can’t wander when you’re focused on something, the productivity costs of being constantly connected can be massive.

One of the most memorable experiments I conducted during my project was to use my smartphone for only an hour a day for three months. After a while of walking around without my smartphone attached at my hip, I began to notice my mind wandering to new ideas and thoughts I wouldn’t have arrived at otherwise. Not only did slashing my smartphone use give me more time to spend on higher-impact tasks, it also let me carve out more attentional space to think about them. Without my smartphone to focus on, my mind instinctively flipped into mind-wandering mode whenever I didn’t have to focus on work, which created the space for ideas and thoughts to rise to my consciousness.

To this day, if I don’t carve out at least thirty minutes of attentional space every day for my mind to wander, my productivity suffers.

YOUR BRAIN NEVER STOPS

The reason thatEurekamoments seem to strike you from out of the blue when you carve out more attentional space for yourself is simple: your brain never stops thinking.

One of my favorite neurological studies was lead byAp Dijksterhuis, at theUniversity of Amsterdam. In the study, participants were given information about four cars and then were asked to pick which car they would buy. Researchers are usually a tricky bunch, and this study was no exception. They made one of the four cars significantly more attractive than the others, to see if participants could identify it as the best. They split the participants into two groups.The first group received information about 4 features per car, and the second received significantly more information—12 features per car—for a total of either 16 or 48 features in total.

Each of those groups was, again, split into two. Before participants were asked to pick a car, each of each group’s participants were then either given four minutes to closely study the features of the car or given a series of totally unrelated word scramble puzzles to focus on for fourminutes. This second group was seemingly at a disadvantage to figure out which car was the best, because they had no time to consciously think about which car was best.

So who fared better?

Here’s where the study gets fascinating. With just four options per car, participants who could consciously think about their choices performed much better. That’s not all that surprising: with just a few options, it was pretty easy for them to deduce which model is the best. But when participants hadtwelveoptions to consider for each of the four cars—forty-eight options to weigh in total—the group that could only unconsciously process the optionsoutperformedthe group who had four full minutes to think deeply about which car was best. And here’s the kicker: they outperformed the conscious group by a massive margin; the conscious thought group picked the right car 23 percent of the time, while the unconscious thought group picked the right car60 percentof the time.

Several years after the experiment was conducted, a research team atCarnegie Mellon University performed a similar study again, but instead of having participants do word scramble puzzles, they had them memorize a sequence of numbers—while they scanned their brain activity inside an fMRI machine.

This team discovered something fascinating: while the brain regions responsible for memorizing numbers were (of course) fired up, so were the prefrontal cortices of the participants, whichcontinued to process the car problemas they completely focused on memorizing the numbers. The unconscious minds of the participants wandered while they processed something unrelated to the task at hand.

Though there is some debate in the scientific community over how powerful our subconscious minds are, these studies illustrate something profound: that our minds never stop thinking. Even when we focus on something with our complete attention, our brain continues, like a computer, to have windows open in the background. And if a problem is particularly complex or requires a creative solution, our subconscious minds may even do a better job—especially when we give ourselves more attentional space to work on it.

MAKING ROOM

I began experimenting with more ways to shift into daydreaming mode during my project.

While I was planning myTEDx talk, I left my phone at home and wandered around Canada’sNational Gallery—just a short bus ride away from where I was living—with only a pen and notepad. To come up with new productivity experiments, I went onnature walks at lunchtime while I let my ideas germinate. On the weekend, I sat in a busy coffee shop with just a notepad to capture any thoughts that came to me.

In every instance in which I carved out time to let mymind wander, I made a point of keeping a notepad close by and shutting off the distractions around me to clear even more attentional space. And every time I captured at least a dozen thoughts, ideas, tasks, and people I should contact or catch up with. Without fail, whenever I carved out space for my mind to wander, countless thoughts would break through my attentional barrier, and I captured them in my notepad so I could deal with them later. In a way, my whole project was centered around connecting dots and coming up with creative ideas, and nothing helped me accomplish that more than carving out attentional space to do nothing.

Even today, in the middle of writing this book, I schedule more time for mind wandering than I ever have before, which has let me capture several hundred ideas for this book. AsSteven Johnson so brilliantly put it in his six-part documentaryHow We Got to Now, “[new] ideas are fundamentally networks of other ideas.” People who are paid big bucks in the knowledge economy are paid to solve problems and connect dots, which makes carving out time for mind wandering that much more important—particularly after you capture the unresolved things weighing on your psyche. Luckily, ourbrains are built for connecting dots, which makes them the perfect tool to use in the knowledge economy—provided we use them intelligently.*

Out of all the methods I tried in my project, though, nothing worked quite as well as simply sitting in a room with a pen and a sheet of paper. Every day or two I would set a timer, usually for fifteen minutes, and then simply give my mind permission to venture off and go wherever it wanted to go. In a way, it was the opposite of a planning session or brain dump—instead of staying in central executive mode, I shifted into daydreaming mode andcaptured theideas and thoughts that would have gone unnoticed otherwise. I still use the same ritual today, and I’m almost always surprised at the ideas, thoughts, and even a few to-dos that come up when I create the attentional space for them to do so.

If this sounds strange, that’s because it is. But your brain is also a peculiar machine, and sitting inside it right now are a ton of valuable thoughts, ideas, and insights it has been processing in the background that are waiting to be captured. A mind capture ritual is another great ritual to add to your Maintenance Day or perform when you feel overwhelmed and need to instantly create more attentional space for yourself.

The more attentional space you have, the calmer you’ll feel, and the more productive you’ll become.

Your brain also continues to process and consolidate new information into memory as yousleep, which is why “sleeping on a problem” can work wonders, and why studying before bed will help you perform better on tests. This is also a great reason to define your three outcomes for the next day at the end of the previous day, or before you head to bed.

*It also helped that I defined a structure for this book ahead of time, which, much like the car problem, gave my brain something concrete to chip away at in the background as I focused on other things.

MENTAL BLISS

During my year of the productivity project, I was able to secure almost as many insights with the other daydreaming techniques I tried, like visiting an art gallery or going for a nature walk. As long as they let me flip into mind-wandering mode and I had a notepad nearby, they worked. Generally speaking, the less attention the ritual required, the better. But even tactics like reading novels, which I thought required a lot of attention, often let me flip into daydreaming mode and capture new ideas. Whether knitting, gardening, yoga, going for a longdrive, walking somewhere without headphones, taking a candlelit bath, or visiting an art gallery works best for you, the key is that you take the time to shift your mind into wandering mode.WheneverEinstein had a difficult nut he was trying to crack, he would do much the same, and play the violin until the answer he was searching for seemingly struck him from out of the blue. The same can work for you, too.

Worth noting:I devote an entire later chapter (this page) to the importance of taking breaks and disconnecting from your work. Working insanely hard without recharging is a recipe for burnout. Since you rely on your brain so much at work, and likely face more pressure than ever before, breaks have never been more important.

TheAmerican Psychological Association (APA) recently named nine of the very best stress-reliefstrategies. Unlike quick fixes like shopping, gambling, drinking, and eating that don’t actually reduce the cortisol levels in your body (the hormone your body produces in response to stress), the nine strategies the organization recommends all actually reduce your cortisol levels. Just as important, most of them also appear, at least on the surface, to flip your brain into mind-wandering mode, which makes them doubly valuable tasks to try when you’re looking to carve out attentional space for yourself. They include:

•Exercising or playing sports

•Reading

•Meditation

•Listening to music

•Investing in a creative hobby

•Praying

•Going for a nature walk

•Spending time with friends and family

•Going for a massage

Whatever your method of choice, taking the time to flip your mind into daydreaming mode can be one of the most productive things you do. Rest assured that when you take a break from your work, your brain will continue working in the background even though you might not be—and if you’re trying to tackle a particularly creative or complex problem, it may even do a better job than your conscious prefrontal cortex will.

Your brain is a powerful machine. But you have to capitalize on its strengths and accommodate its weaknesses. Giving it space to slip into daydreaming mode, while externalizing the tasks, projects, and commitments you’re working on, does exactly that.

Whenever you’re in mind-wandering mode, again, make sure you capture what your brain comes up with, so that no great ideas slip through the cracks.

Time required:15 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:2/10

Value:7/10

Fun:9/10

What you’ll get out of it:A wealth of brand-new ideas that are residing in your brain, waiting to be harvested once you give them the necessary attentional space.

You probably saw this challenge coming from a mile away. My challenge for you this time is to let your mind wander for at least fifteen minutes tomorrow, and to capture any valuable thoughts, ideas, or things you have to do that break through your attentional barrier.

My favorite way to do this is to sit somewhere I won’t be distracted or interrupted, with just a pen and notepad, and set a timer for fifteen minutes.

If you’re like me, you’ll be stunned at what comes to mind. You may even want to keep going for a longer period of time, say half an hour.