Part One

LAYING THE GROUNDWORK

WHERE TO START

Takeaway:Everyone likes the idea of becoming more productive and making positive changes to his or her life. But in practice, both are tough, and having a deep, meaningful reason for becoming more productive will help you sustain yourmotivation in the long run.

Estimated Reading Time:8 minutes, 40 seconds

A DREAM COME TRUE

Before each chapter, I’ve included a takeaway of what you’ll get out of it, so you can prime your mind for what’s to come. I’ve also included an estimate of how long it will take you to read each chapter, based on an average reading speed of 250 words per minute.

I have been enchanted with the idea of becoming an early riser since I can remember. Before starting my project, I would frequently daydream about waking up just a few minutes before my alarm clock sounded at 5:30, propelling myself out of bed to ritualistically prepare a coffee, catch up on the news that had taken place overnight, meditate, and go for a morning run before the rest of the world woke up. In my daydream I also woke up besideMila Kunis, but that’s for another book.

Suffice it to say, when I startedA Year of Productivity, I was determined to wake up at 5:30 everymorning—even if it took me all year.

Before my project, as obsessed as I was with productivity, my nighttime and morningroutines couldn’t have been less conducive to an early morning routine. After I would finish working for the day (as efficiently as possible, naturally), I would often lose track of time reading, hanging out with friends, or soaking in online cosmology lectures until I was either out of time or energy for the evening. As much as I was in love with the idea of rising early, becoming an early riser would have meant completely changing my nighttime rituals and morning routines, which felt like more than I could handle.

Of all the productivity experiments I conducted during my year of productivity, waking up at 5:30 was easily the most challenging. At first, I found that my 9:30 target bedtime snuck up faster and faster, and that I often had to make the choice: pack things in earlier in the day when I still had lots to do, or stay up late to get everything done and sleep in later. I sometimes found myself going to bed right when I had the most energy, focus, andcreativity—I’m a natural late-night person—and so I decided to stay up later. I also wanted to hang out with my friends and my girlfriend when I was finished researching and writing for the day, which would have been impossible if I headed to bed early.

After about six months of chipping away at countless habits to integrate an early morning routine into my life, I settled into a new wake-up ritual, one where I rewarded myself for waking up early (this page), shut off my devices from 8 p.m. to 8 a.m. (this page), quit drinking caffeine at noon (this page), and eased into the ritual by gradually moving my bedtime earlier over the course of a couple of months (this page). I’ll explain these tactics in detail later on, but needless to say, this was one of those experiments where I learned a lot of valuable lessons the hard way.

Nonetheless, six months in, I had done it: I had woken up at 5:30 every weekday morning for several weeks and settled into a new morning ritual. My morning routine was the stuff I imagined productivity dreams are made of:

•5:30–6:00: Wake up; prepare and drink a coffee.

•6:00–7:15: Walk to the gym; plan out my entire day while working out.

•7:15–8:15: Make a big, healthy breakfast; shower; meditate.

•8:15: Reconnect to the internet (after my daily shutoff ritual).

•8:15–9:00: Read.

•9:00–: Begin working.

I continued to follow the ritual for several months afterward, religiously powering down my devices every night at 8 p.m., heading to bed at 9:30, and waking up promptly at 5:30, feeling virtuous and pleased with my efforts until, one Monday morning, I realized something that stopped me cold in my tracks. I absolutelyhatedgoing to bed and waking upearly.

After my initial excitement over my new routine wore off, I found myself growing tired of saying no to hanging out with my friends, simply because I had to head to bed early. I couldn’t stand quitting work when I was “in the zone” late at night. Every morning I found I felt groggy for the first hour or two I was awake. And I discovered I much preferred to meditate, work out, read, and plan out my day later on in the day, when I had more energy and attention to bring to the tasks.

Worst of all, the ritualdidn’tmake me more productive. With my new routine, I found I accomplished what I intended to a lot less often, wrote fewer words on average per day, and had less energy and focus throughout the day. And after doing the research, I discovered that there is absolutely no difference in socioeconomic standing between someone who is an early riser and someone who is anight owl—we are all wired differently, and one routine is not inherently better than another.It’s what you do with your waking hours, I discovered, that makes the difference in how productive you are (I talk more about this onthis page).

As much as I adored the idea of waking up early, in practice I liked waking up later much more.

PRODUCTIVITY WITH A PURPOSE

I think the same is true of productivity itself. Everyone likes theideaof taking on more and making positive changes to their life. But in practice, becoming more productive is one of the toughest things you can undertake to do. If it were easy, I probably wouldn’t have dedicated a year of my life to exploring the topic, and there would be no reason for this book to exist.

Though I learned a great many productivity lessons from this yearlong experiment, perhaps the biggest lesson I learned was just how important it is to deeply care aboutwhyyou want to become more productive.

If I were reading this book instead of writing it, that last sentence is one I might have glossed over, so I think it’s worth repeating:perhaps the biggest lesson I learned from this experiment was just how important it is to deeply care about your productivity goals, aboutwhyyou want to become more productive.

When I committed to turning my morning and nighttime routines inside out to wake up at 5:30 every morning, I didn’t think much about whether I deeply cared about waking up early. I was in love with the sepia-toned fantasy of being the “productivity guy” who rose while everyone else was still sleeping and got more done than everyone else. I didn’t think much about what it would take to make that a reality, or about whether I actually cared about what was involved in making that change on a deeper level.

Working deliberately and purposefully throughout the day can make or break how productive you are. But having a purpose is just as important. The intention behind your actions is like the shaft behind an arrowhead—it’s pretty difficult to become more productive day in and day out when you don’t care about what you want to accomplish on a deeper level. This productivity insight isby farthe least sexy tip in this book, but it may be the most important. Investing countless hours becoming more productive, or taking on new habits or routines, is a waste if you don’t actually care about the changes you’re trying to make. And you won’t have themotivation to sustain these changes in the long term.

SEXYVALUES

The reason I have continued to research and explore productivity over the last decade is that productivity is connected with so many things I value at a deep level: efficiency, meaning, control, discipline, growth, freedom, learning, staying organized. These values are what motivate me to spend so much of myleisure time reading and seeking out online science lectures.

Waking up at 5:30 every morning? Not so much.

A long procession of people before me have written about “acting in accordance with your values,” and to be honest, whenever I’ve read those kinds of statements about values, I have almost always tuned out, or simply read on. UnlikeMila Kunis, values are anything but sexy. But they are most definitely worth thinking about when you’re planning on making major changes to your life. If I had taken just a few minutes to think about how waking up early was connected with what I deeply cared about—not at all—I could have saved myself months of willpower and sacrifice and done something much more productive with that time. Questioningwhyyou want to make a change to your life can save you countless hours or even days of time, when you discover that you don’t really want to make the change in the first place.

THE PRACTICAL PART

I know right now you’re deep in “reading mode” and aren’t eager to stop reading and perform a quick challenge, despite how much more productive doing so will make you.

But making the jump between knowing and doing is what productivity is all about.

Let’s gently transition from “reading” into “doing” and try the first productivity challenge of the book. Don’t worry, it’s a lot easier than you think: most of the challenges in this book will take you less than ten minutes, and all you need for most of them is a pen and a sheet or two of paper. There isn’t a challenge in every chapter, but I have added themwhen I think they will be worth your time. I know your time is the mostvaluable and limited resource you have, and I promise I won’t waste any of it. For every minute you spend on these challenges, I promise you’ll make that time back at least ten times over.

Ready to go?

Go ahead and grab yourself a pen and paper, and then read on.

Time required:7 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:6/10

Value:8/10

Fun:3/10

What you’ll get out of it:Access to your deeper reasons for becoming more productive. If you’re using the tactics in this book to take more on, you could potentially save countless hours by only focusing on theproductivity goals you care about. The return on this challenge can be massive.

I know that if I simply suggested you make a list of your deepest-heldvalues and then create aplan how to act in accordance with them, you’d either put down this book to write a negative review onAmazon, or skip ahead to see what other productivity tips I have up my sleeve.

For that reason, I’ve instead selected a few very simple questions for you to ask yourself that I’ve found helpful when examining new routines and habits. I’ve personally done every single one of the challenges in this book and can vouch for their efficacy. They work. I’m not just pulling them out of the ether to waste your time. To start with:

•Imagine this: As a result of implementing the tactics in this book, you havetwo more hoursof leisure time every day. How will you use that time? What new things will you take on? What will you spend more time on?

•When you picked up this book, what productivity goals, or new habits, routines, or rituals did you have in mind that you wanted to take on?

Here are some important questions regarding your values and goals to think about.

•Go deep.Ask yourself: What deep-rooted values are associated with your productivity goals? Why do you want to become more productive? If you find yourself coming up with a lot of values you deeply care about (like meaning, community, relationships, freedom, learning, etc.), chances are you care about the goal on a deep personal level, and the change you have in mind is probably worth making. If you find yourself blustering your way through this exercise, maybe a particular change or goal isn’t in tune with your values and is not really all that important to you. (Google “list of values” for a few great lists to start with.)

•If thinking about values is too daunting to you,fill in this blank with each change you want to make: Ideeplycare about this because. Spin off as many reasons as you can to determine whether you care about each change on a deeper level.

•Another quick shortcutto determine if a change is meaningful to you: fast-forward to when you’re on your deathbed. Ask yourself: Would I regret doing more or less of this?

I believe the point of greater productivity is to carve out more time for the things that are actually meaningful to you.

But tasks and commitments aren’t valuable only because they are meaningful to you. They can also be valuable because they have a significant impact in your work.

NOT ALL TASKS ARE CREATED EQUAL

Takeaway:Not all tasks are created equal; there are certain tasks in your work that, for every minute you spend on them, let you accomplish more than your other tasks. Taking a step back from your work toidentify yourhighest-impact tasks will let you invest your time, attention, and energy in the right things.

Estimated Reading Time:9 minutes, 47 seconds

MEDITATING FOR THIRTY-FIVE HOURS

I learned the hard way how important it was to slow down and work more deliberately when I abandoned my meditation practice. So I decided to conduct an experiment to get to the bottom of just how muchmeditation and slowing down impacted myproductivity—and designed an experiment to meditate for thirty-five hours over six days.

As a seasoned meditator I was no stranger to meditating for long stretches of time. Before the experiment, I had meditated for thirty minutes every day for several years, practiced meditation with myBuddhist meditation group every week, and attended an occasional meditation retreat, where I lived in total silence for days at a time while meditating with other attendees for five or six hours every day.

Thirty-five hours of meditation in a week would be a lot for even our old friend the seasoned monk, who takes an hour to do anything. But I was too curious not to do it. To spice things up, throughout the week Ialso performed the same simple chores and tasks I would usually undertake, but in a mindful state.

While running the experiment, I tried my best to remain as productive as possible during the time when I wasn’t meditating, so I could observe the day-to-day effects of meditation on my energy levels, focus, and productivity.

Over six days—after live-streaming a tally of how long I meditated for each day—I performed:

•14.3 hours of sitting meditation

•8.5 hours of walking meditation

•6.2 hours of mindfully doing chores

•6 hours of mindful eating

MEASURING PRODUCTIVITY

One of the most interesting parts of this project was how circular it was by design. Being productive about studying productivity is, in a way, like writing about writing. But first and foremost,A Year of Productivitywas a research project, and to me, having a productive day meant learning as much as possible, and sharing what I learned with readers of my blog to help them become more productive, too.

When I startedA Year of Productivity, I created a fancy landing page on my website that contained live-updating charts of exactly how many words I wrote, pages I read, and hours I worked each day (it’s still live athttp://alifeofproductivity.com/statistics). My thought behind the graphs was simple: the more I wrote and read, the more productive I would be.

The problem with these metrics, as you might have guessed, is they only tell a part of the story. If I worked all day long and wrote 1,000 words, I would be considered productive under these metrics. But what if I intended to write2,000words and wrote only 1,000? What if I couldn’t focus all day long and wasted hours watching cooking shows onNetflix? What if I felt totally burned out at the end of the day? What if those 1,000 words were worthless? The entireGettysburg Address, after all, was only 272 words!

A month or two into my project, I realized my mistake in designing my website’s Stats page—a mistake I think people make all too often withproductivity. I had essentially reverted to a factorymindset and equated productivity withefficiency, instead of looking at how much I accomplished. Once I set aside that mindset, and instead focused on how much I accomplished, my productivity skyrocketed.

I think the best way to measure productivity is to ask yourself a very simple question at the end of every day:Did I get done what I intended to?When you accomplish what you intend to, and you’re realistic and deliberate about the productivity goals you set, in my opinion you are productive.

If at the beginning of the day you intend to write a thousand great words, and you do, you were productive.

If you intend to finish a report at work, ace a job interview, and spend quality time with your family, and you do, again, you are perfectly productive.

If you intend to relax for a day, and you have the most relaxing day you’ve had all year, you were perfectly productive.

Intention and deliberateness are two sides of the same coin, and I think both are essential if you want to live more productively. Asking myself whether I accomplished what I intended to was the first of two ways I measured how productive I was over the course of my project.

The second was observing how each new experiment or productivity technique affected my ability to manage the threeingredients of productivity:

•Time:I observed how intelligently I used my time, how much I got done throughout the day, how many words and pages I wrote/read, and how often I procrastinated.

•Attention:I noted what I focused on, how well I focused, and how easily I was distracted.

•Energy:I scrutinized how much drive, motivation, and overall energy I had, tracking how my energy levels fluctuated over the course of an experiment.

Naturally, these variables are more subjective than whether I accomplished what I had intended to accomplish. My productivity experiments triggered me to study the research when I noticed how a topic affected how I spent my time, attention, or energy. I’m skeptical by nature, so I leaned on science as much as possible to explain my results. Plus, the science behind this stuff is fascinating.

WORKING SMARTER

While mymeditation experiment helped me to improve my focus more than anything I had tried up to that point, the experiment had another effect I hadn’t anticipated: it let me manage mytimebetter, because it made it much easier for me to identify what was important, which let me work smarter instead of just harder.

The reason I found it easier to work smarter during this experiment wasn’t because of the meditation practice itself. It was simply because I had so little time to get work done that week. During the experiment, I continued to write articles and read as much as possible. But since I had so little time to do it in, I frequently had to step back from my work to reflect on whether the writing I was doing was important and worth doing. With so little time, it was my only option. (A similar thing happened during my experiment on ninety-hour workweeks.)

This led me to one of my most obvious-in-hindsight epiphanies:not all tasks are created equal.Put another way, there are certain tasks in your work that, minute for minute, lead you to accomplish more. This is true regardless of where you work or what you do.

Take, for example, tasks like:

•Planning out your week

•Mentoring new employees

•Investing in your learning

•Pushing back on meetings without an agenda

•Saying no to as much busywork as possible

•Automating repetitive tasks

•Looking at pictures of baby animals (more oncute baby animals)

Minute for minute, you accomplish more doing these tasks than you do through tasks like:

•Attending pointless meetings

•Keeping up-to-date withsocial media

•Checking your email repeatedly

•Reading news websites

•Participating in idle chitchat

The more time, energy, and attention you invest in your most significant tasks, the more you accomplish in the same amount of time, and the moreproductive you become.

When meditating for thirty-five hours a week, I had about twenty hours outside of the experiment to get real work done, which meant that if I didn’t determine what my smartest tasks were, I wouldn’t have accomplished what I intended to that week. That forced me to step back from my work to carefully plan my week so I could make the most use of the limited time I had.

At some level, everyone knows that not all tasks are equal—most people can see that they will accomplish more working on doing their taxes for an hour than watching a movie. But as the cliché goes, common sense isn’t always common action. Just because you know something to be true, doesn’t mean you’ll act on it—even though acting on what you know is exactly what you have to do in order to become more productive.

YOUR MOST IMPORTANT TASKS

A task, project, or commitment is important for one of two reasons: because it’s meaningful to you (it’s connected with your values) or because it makes a large impact in your work. Activities that are connected with your deepest-held values will lead you to be happier and more motivated,and activities that are primary to your work will let you become more productive in the same amount of time. If you’re lucky, you’ll have tasks in your job that are both meaningful and effective. How close or how far your job is from working in a factory or an assembly line will determine how much control you have over this. Whereas afactory worker has to work on whatever he’s assigned, an entrepreneur can work on whatever she wants.*

As I began to think hard about how I spent my time, I quickly realized how much productivity I was leaving on the table every day—not because I wasn’t working hard, but because I wasn’t working hard on the best possible tasks. I wasn’t as productive as I could have been because I had never sat down, determined the highest-impact tasks in my work, and deliberately worked on those tasks. Instead, I had been spending my time on the items that happened to fall onto my to-do list.

I think this realization speaks volumes to how valuable this project became for me, and for many of my readers. When we’re hunkered down in our work, we often aren’t able to step back to observe how smart we’re working. Keeping productivity in mind for an entire year led me to many realizations like this one—despite how obvious some of those insights are in hindsight.

You may already be familiar with the “Pareto Principle,” often referred to as the80-20 rule. The rule says that 80 percent of [some result] comes from 20 percent of [some cause]. For example, 80 percent of your sales come from 20 percent of your customers, or 80 percent of all income is earned by 20 percent of the people. I think this rule can be applied to productivity as well: a very small number of tasks lead to the majority of what you accomplish.

Productivity isn’t about doing more things—it’s about doing the right things.

After my meditation experiment, I took the time to step back from my project, make a list of everything I was responsible for, and pick mymost important tasks. That’s when I discovered something fascinating: I accomplished the most through justthreemain tasks. In order, they were:

1.Writing articles about what I learned during my project

2.Conductingproductivity experiments on myself

3.Reading and researching about productivity

Naturally, I had other things I was responsible for as well—like website maintenance, sending email newsletters, interviewing experts, managing my social media accounts, answering email, and coaching people on becoming more productive—but it was through the preceding three activities that I accomplished the most by a long shot. All my other commitments led me to accomplish less in the same amount of time, and most of them could be eliminated or compressed (seePart Four).

*As a quick aside, I don’t consider either type of task better or worse, since everyone values meaningful work and money differently.

Estimated time to do the challenge:10 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:8/10

Value:10/10

Fun:8/10

What you’ll get out of it:You will discover the highest-impact tasks in your work, which will show you where you should invest the majority of your time, attention, and energy. Before you invest in increasing your productivity, it’s crucial you determine which areas you want to become more productive in. This simple activity will help you do that. This challenge also lays the groundwork for the rest of this book.

Thankfully, you don’t have to meditate for thirty-five hours in a week to determine your highest-impact tasks.

I have experimented with innumerable techniques to help me organize and prioritize my tasks, and while some systems worked well, most quickly fell by the wayside. Prioritizing everything you’re responsible for might sound like a pain, but people make it out to be much more complicated than it actually is.

Of all the challenges in this book, this is one of the most important.After all, it is difficult to become more productive when you don’t first take stock of what you should actually be productive on.

My absolute favorite technique for prioritizing what’s important comes fromBrian Tracy, who wrote the bookEat That Frog.Brian, who has a similar view on high-impact tasks, says in his book that “90 percent of the value that you contribute to your company is contained in [just] three tasks.”

Brian recommends a linear process to identify your highest-impact tasks, projects, and commitments. His method is quite simple, and I have modified and expanded on it a bit to make it more helpful:

1. Make a list of everything you’re responsible for in your work.This part of the activity takes the longest, but it feels incredible toget everything you’re responsible for onto a sheet of paper in front of you (or into whatever your preferred digital equivalent is). There’s a good chance you haven’t taken a moment to step back and think about everything you’re responsible for in your work on a weekly or monthly basis.

2. After you’ve collected a list of everything you’re responsible for, ask yourself:If you could just doone itemon that list all day, every day, what item would you do that would allow you to accomplish the most with the same amount of time? Put another way, what item on the list is the mostvaluable to your boss or yourself (if you’re self-employed, like I am)?

3. Finally, ask yourself:If you could do onlytwo more items onthat list all day, what second and third tasks let you accomplish the most in the same amount of time?

These three tasks (or four, if you have a fourth that’s as important as your top three) are the 20 percent of your tasks through which you contributeat least80 percent of your value.Valueis the operative word here; unlike your mostmeaningful tasks, your most purposeful tasks may not necessarily contribute a lot of value or meaning toyou, but they contribute an incredible amount of value to your productivity.

As I began to deliberately and intentionally invest more time, attention, and energy into my highest-return tasks, my productivity shot through the roof. Working smarter instead of just harder is impossible without first stepping back from your work, and that’s what this first section of the book—Laying the Groundwork—is all about.

After you’ve begun to lay the groundwork by determining your smartest tasks to work on, what comes next?

Working on them, of course.

THREE DAILY TASKS

Takeaway:The absolute best technique I’ve found to work deliberately and with intention every day is theRule of 3. The rule is simple: at the beginning of each day, before you start working, decide what three things you want to accomplish by the end of the day. Do the same at the start of every week.

Estimated Reading Time:8 minutes, 1 second

THE RULE OF 3

Knowing your most valuable tasks is important, but asG.I. Joe would say, knowing is only half the battle. When you sit in front of your computer tomorrow morning and open up your inbox, it is far too easy to forget about what’s important to work on when more urgent (but less important) tasks come your way.

So while working deliberately is good in theory, what does it actually look like in practice?

I have experimented with dozens of systems to manage everything on my plate—everything from the GTD (Getting Things Done) system, to “kanban,” to keeping sticky notes everywhere, to trying out moreproductivityapps than I can count. Most of them worked well for capturing and organizing everything I had to get done—and I’ll talk about the ones that will help you the most later on. But every single one of them also had a rather large downside: they didn’t help me slow down and work more deliberately.

Having a great system for managing what you need to get done is important, but it’s just as important to work on the tasks you organize in your system deliberately, with intention. That’s what this chapter is about. Before you invest in better managing your time, attention, and energy, it’s important you continue laying the groundwork by deciding what to focus on every day.

And that’s where the Rule of 3 comes in.

About halfway into my project I picked up aproductivity book namedGetting Results the Agile Way, written byJ. D. Meier,Microsoft’s director of business programs. On the surface, the book looks more like a textbook than it does a general interest book—it’s typeset in Papyrus, which is among my least favorite typefaces on the planet. But the content is incredibly powerful because of the way it focuses on productivity through a lens of simplicity. One of my favorite nuggets from the book is “the Rule of 3.”Though the concept behind the idea is nothing new—and has been talked about before by productivitybloggers likeLeo Babauta ofZen HabitsandGina Trapani ofLifehacker—it was new to me, and too intriguing not to try.

Although you can download all the productivity apps in the world (and I have), no app will make you care about what you have to do like the Rule of 3.

The rule is dead simple:

1.At the beginning of every day, mentally fast-forward to the end of the day, and ask yourself:When the day is over, what three things will I want to have accomplished?Write those three things down.

2.Do the same at the beginning of every week.

The three things you identify then become your focus for the day and the week ahead.

That’s it.

WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE IN PRACTICE

When I first started experimenting with the rule, it took me a couple of weeks to adjust. At first, I made my threedaily accomplishments too small and way overshot them. Then I started to make them too ambitious—sometimes intimidatingly so—and felt much less motivated throughout the day as I fell short. About a week and a half into experimenting with the ritual, I finally settled into the rightbalance: one where I became aware of how much time, attention, and energy I had to get stuff done every day.

To give you an idea of what the rule looks like in practice, here are three things I defined this morning that I’m aiming to accomplish today:

1.Finish the Rule of 3 chapter of book

2.Clear out my email inbox—and only check email twice throughout the day

3.Organize everything I need to get a U.S. tax number

When I sat down this morning and thought ahead to the end of the day, these are the three things I wanted to accomplish—and so far I’m on pace to do so.

Just for fun, here are the three things I’m aiming to accomplish this week:

1.Finalize the “Laying the Groundwork” section of book and send to my editor

2.Write and load blog posts for the month

3.Createmind maps (a graphical way of thinking out ideas and concepts) for two speaking engagements in January

At the start of every day and week, I also define threepersonalthings I want to accomplish. I don’t always come up with three (and the same is true for my work items), but I find that the ritual lets me feel much morein control of my week ahead and also get excited about the things I have coming up. In case you’re curious, here are my three goals for today and for this week:

Today:

1.Have fun at tea tasting withArdyn (my girlfriend)

2.Read twenty-five pages for fun

3.Finalize Christmas shopping list

And for this week:

1.Plan for and buy all Christmas presents

2.Completely disconnect from work for birthday plans

3.Pack; travel home for Christmas

These goals are simple, but they’re aligned to what I value and find meaningful, and you can bet I’ll feel connected and engaged after I accomplish them.

Determine the foremost meaningful tasks in your work and life. Use theRule of 3 on a daily and weekly basis.

THINKING IN THREES

When I asked J. D. Meier why choosing just three daily and weekly accomplishments works best—why not two? or one? or four or five?—he had an intriguing answer. “I originally focused on the Rule of 3 because when my manager asked me what the team achieved for the week, he didn’t want a laundry list. He was willing to listen to three compelling outcomes.”

When J.D. later asked his own team members what they were focused on for the day, he similarly found himself not wanting to hear more than three outcomes, or three meaningful things: “And for myself, I found that three things was very easy to keep top of mind, withouthaving to write it down or look it up. I could rattle off my three outcomes in the hall. This especially helped when doing prioritization on the fly or to really keep myself on track.”

Three may seem like an arbitrary number on the surface, but it’s large enough to fit the main things you want to accomplish, and small enough to make you think hard about what’s important. The rule also helps you work smarter because by deciding what you intend to accomplish, you consequently decide what youdon’tintend to accomplish. And since the rule focuses on the goals you want to accomplish instead of how much you get done, it’s much more in line with what productivity is all about.

You don’t have to look far to see evidence that we like to think in threes. According to J.D., “the simplest reason [three accomplishments work so well] is because our brains are trained from early on to think in threes: the beginning, the middle, the end.” For example, “the military uses threes to help people remember survival information: You can go three minutes without air, three days without water, three weeks without food.”

When you look around, there are also countless examples of sets of threes embedded everywhere: the three bears, three blind mice, three little pigs, and three musketeers; phrases like “blood, sweat, and tears” and “the good, the bad, and the ugly”; and ideas like gold, silver, and bronze medals, and “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.” Our mind is wired to think in groups of three.

It also works well because, well, despite your best intentions, emergencies come up, more urgent tasks come your way, and crises will erupt. Defining three things to accomplish will give you a guiding light when you’re in the trenches, as opposed to tackling a laundry list of things you want to get done, and the dissatisfied feeling of not accomplishing any of it. While later I’ll dive into the best ways I’ve found to deflect unimportant work, shrinklow-impact tasks, and minimize the noise around you, having just three items to focus on throughout the day and week will help you stay centered and accomplish more even on days where everything hits the fan. I think J.D. put it well when he said, “Simplicity makes it easier to evolve and innovate and deal with complexity.”

Estimated time to do challenge:5 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:6/10

Value:8/10

Fun:9/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll be able to step back to determine what your most productive tasks are at the beginning of the day, the tasks where you should be investing the predominance of your time, attention, and energy. This will give you something to focus on throughout the day, so you can work smarter instead of just harder.

The challenge here is simple: try the Rule of 3 tomorrow morning.

To accomplish more and spend time on your highest-impact tasks, you have to act on them on a daily basis.

Before you open up your inbox or start your day tomorrow, simply sit down with a pen and paper, mentally fast-forward to the end of the day, and write down the three main things you want to have accomplished when the day is done. Fighting the urge to check your email is tough, but it’s worth resisting so you can step back to have a clear mind while you think about what’s important to you. If you have trouble thinking in terms of things you will achieve, J.D. Meier recommends you think in terms of “wins, achievements, or highlights,” like achieving a milestone on a project, clearing out your backlog of things to do, or winning over a customer.

I also find it helpful to look through my calendar to see what meetings and commitments I have coming up, so I can get a good handle on how much time, attention, and energy I’ll have to work with. Becoming more productive is a process of understanding your constraints, and observing how much time, attention, and energy you have will help you adjust accordingly. (In the very next chapter, I’ll guide you through accounting for all three ingredients of productivity in more detail.)

If you want to ramp up the rule even further, here are a few simple suggestions:

•Think about when, where, and how you’re going to accomplish each item throughout the day.Studies show this makes acting out the goal easier and more automatic, and that it’s especially helpful for carrying out unpleasant tasks.

•In addition to deciding on the three main things you want to accomplish, select other small tasks you intend to accomplish over the course of the day. The three things you intend to accomplish may be your primary focuses for the day, but there will almost definitely be other smaller tasks you need to accomplish, too. Keep in mind your constraints.

•Start with just the daily ritual. Once you feel how effective the Rule of 3 is over the course of the day, you’ll jump at the chance to use it on a weekly basis, too. Trust me on this one.

•Whenplanning, keep your highest-impact tasks in the back of your mind. And if you decide to try the rule in your personal life (which is worth a shot, especially when you have a lot of personal goals), keep in mind how connected your three accomplishments are with your values.

•Set two alarms during your workday. When they go off ask yourself:Do you remember what your three daily goals are? Do you remember your three weekly goals? If you do, are you on track to achieve them?

•At the end of the day and week, reflect on how realistic your three accomplishments were. Were they too small and did you overshoot them? Or were they too large and intimidating? Did you have a good understanding of how much time, attention, and energy you would have to accomplish the three items? Reflecting on how realistic you were will let the rule help you more and more over time.

When your aim is to work more deliberately and accomplish more over the course of the day, the Rule of 3 is in a league of its own.

READY FOR PRIME TIME

Takeaway:When you take the time to observe how your energy fluctuates over the course of the day, you can work on your highest-impact tasks during your Biological Prime Time—when you are able to bring the most energy and focus to them. In a similar way, tracking how you spend your time over a week will let you see how intelligently you use your time, and how well you focus throughout the day.

Estimated Reading Time:11 minutes, 3 seconds

Ifidentifying your highest-impact tasks and your daily focus were enough to become perfectly productive, this book could end right here. But our story is just getting started—and not only because I have an eighty thousand word count to hit. It’s because, despite our best intentions to work on the right things, we don’t, for countless reasons.

All these reasons involve either how you spend your time, attention, or energy. And I definitely don’t count myself out of this group: almost every day I waste time, become distracted, have trouble focusing, and feel low on energy. Thanks to my research and practice, I may be better than most, but I would be lying if I said I was perfectly productive—and so would any otherproductivity expert out there.

Chances are you’re in the same boat. Despite your best intentions, you don’t have as much time, energy, or attention as you would like. Or perhaps you procrastinate (Part Two of the book), spend too much time onlow-impact tasks that get thrown your way (Part Three), don’t spend your time intelligently (Part Four), feel overwhelmed (Part Five), areconstantly distracted and can’t focus (Part Six), or don’t properly cultivate how muchenergy you have (Part Seven). From what I’ve experienced, that is perfectly normal.

Throughout the rest of the book, I’ll provide you with the absolute best ways I’ve uncovered to better manage your time, attention, and energy. But before you learn to better manage the threeingredients of productivity, it’s essential that you establish one final, important piece of groundwork, and take stock of howwell you manage your time, attention, and energy already.

The following two productivity experiments measured how I managed my time, attention, and energy; they produced valuable intel into how I was doing: one experiment measured my energy over the course of the day, and another diligently tracked how I spent my time and attention.

YOURBIOLOGICAL PRIME TIME

As you may already be aware, your energy levels can fluctuate quite a bit over the course of the day.

If you’re anearly bird, you have more energy early in the morning. If you’re anight owl, you have more energy late at night. After you drink a coffee, you may feel a suddenenergy boost, and then anenergy crash later on. And if you’re like many people, your energy levels may crash in the early afternoon, after your energy levels spike after a large lunch.

I see energy as the fuel that you burn over the course of the day to become productive. As such, it’s critically important that you manage your energy well. If you have no fuel in the tank to do good work, or you’re burned out because you don’t cultivate your energy levels throughout the day byeating well or getting enough sleep, your productivity will plummet, regardless of how well you manage your time or attention.

To get to the bottom of how my energy levels fluctuated over the course of a typical day during my project, I designed an experiment where I kept a log every hour of the day to assess how much energy I had, for three weeks. During those weeks I also did the following:

•Cut out all caffeine andalcohol from my diet

•Ate as littlesugar as possible

•Ate small, frequent meals throughout the day for fuel

•Woke up and fell asleep naturally, without setting an alarm

The reasoning behind this productivity experiment was simple: by tracking the natural ebbs and flows of my energy over the course of a few weeks, with as few stimulants as possible, I would get an accurate picture of how much energy I naturally had throughout the day. I would then be able to take steps to become more productive. For example, I would be able to work on my most important tasks when I naturally had the most energy, or take steps to increase my body’s and brain’s energy when my energy naturally dipped.Everyone is wired differently, and everyone has different energy patterns throughout the day, depending on how their biological clock is set. I wanted to get to the bottom of how my clock was set in this experiment.

After three weeks of inputting how much energy I had every hour, an interesting pattern emerged.

Every day between the hours of 10 a.m. to noon and from 5 p.m. to 8 p.m., I had more energy than any other time of the day.

Different experts refer to this high peak time period by different names, but my favorite is yourBiological Prime Time (BPT), a phrase coined bySam Carpenter in his bookWork the System

Taking the time to observe how your energy fluctuates over the course of the day, you can work on your highest-impact tasks during your BPT—when you are able to bring the most energy and focus to them—and work on your lower-impact tasks when your energy levels dip.

The most productive people don’t just manage their time well, they also manage their energy and attention well. Rearranging your day around when you have the most energy is one simple way to work smarter instead of just harder.

After determining my BPT, I began to rearrange what I worked on over the course of the day, accordingly. Every day, between the hours of 10 a.m. and noon, and 5 and 8 p.m., I worked on my highest-impact and mostmeaningful tasks. Conversely, when my energy dipped throughout the day, I worked on my lowest-impact tasks, or invested in a lasting energy boost (like drinking a cup of green tea), and took time to recharge.

Research shows that your brain’sprefrontal cortex—the part of your brain responsible for creative thinking—is the most active immediately after you wake up. That means that even if you’re low on energy after you wake up, if you do a lot of creative work, you may want to consider working in the morning instead of when you have the most energy, focus, and motivation.To me, it also feels incredible to tackle your important tasks at the beginning of the day—you’ll feel like you’re unstoppable for the rest of the day.

You may not have complete control over what you work on and when you work on it, but whenever you do, choosing the smartest time to work on high- andlow-impact tasks can make a huge difference in your productivity. For example, if you have the most energy at noon, why would you break for lunch then, instead of waiting until you actually need to refuel?

We’ll do a deep dive into how to take advantage of when you have the most energy later on, but getting a handle on your body’s naturalrhythm is one of the best ways I’ve found to work smarter instead of just harder.

Of course, your energy is just one of the three ingredients of productivity. Becoming aware of how intelligently you spend your time and attention is just as important.

A DAY IN YOUR LIFE

Although I’ve never been much of a procrastinator, I’ve always been a dawdler.

Before taking a shower in the morning, I dawdle and tidy up things around the house. Before heading out the door to run errands, I often open up a book to read a few pages, snack a bit, or get lost in my thoughts.

I don’t waste a ton of time in general, and I almost always get done what I intend to get done, but I love punctuating my productivity with short bursts ofdawdling throughout the day. Dawdling helps me decompress, transition from one activity to the next, and even come up with better ideas (Chapter 17). Sure, it frustrates the hell out of the people around me—virtually every woman in my life, including my mom, sister, and girlfriend, has at some point told me to “quit my dawdling”—but I love it.

Much like calculating my BPT, tracking how I spent my time every hour for a week was simple in theory, but quite tedious in practice. To do so, I printed out a sheet of paper that looked much like anExcel spreadsheet, with a grid with the hours of the day in rows, and the days of the week as columns. Before getting to the results of my time log, it’s worth talking briefly about why keeping a time log is so powerful.

I personally don’t maintain a time log very often, largely because doing so takes so much effort. But every few months or so I make an effort to track how I spend my time to see how intelligently I’m using what limited time I have. Of the three ingredients every day that will make you more productive, your time is the most limited. While there are a multitude of ways to get more focus and energy, there’s no way to get more time.

To spend your time more intelligently—on your highest-impact andmost meaningful tasks—you have to be aware of how you’re already spending yourtime, so you can make adjustments. For example, you might value personal fitness andspirituality and yet spend zero minutes over the course of a week on either one. Or you might decide that training your team is one of your most important work tasks and, again, spend no time on the task throughout the week. Without becoming aware of how you currently spend your time, it’s hard to reflect on whether you’re acting in ways that match up with what your values and highest-impact tasks are. Keeping atime log is a great way to find your starting point, your base level, to better access how often you work on your highest-impact and most meaningful tasks.

A time log is also a great way to determine how well you focus throughout the day. If you check in every hour to jot down what you’re doing and find that you consistently put important things off, you may need to invest in battlingprocrastination (Chapter 5), working out your attention muscle (Chapter 18), or reducing the number of distractions around you (Chapter 19).

Laura Vanderkam, the time-taming author ofI Know How She Does Itand168 Hours: You Have More Time Than You Think, says that keeping a time log is a very useful tool to get a map of how you’reactuallyspending your time.

“It can seem like a tedious and boring task, but it can free up literally hours in your week,” she told me. “The key is to find a system that works for you.”

Naturally, since you’re logging how you spend your time every hour (or half hour, or fifteen minutes), keeping a time log also makes you accountable to yourself every hour, instead of holding yourself accountable at the end of the day when you reflect back on whether you accomplished what you intended to.Studies show that when you keep afood log you double the amount of weight you lose. A similar effect occurs after you begin to maintain a time log.

Vanderkam usually records her time in thirty-minute chunks each quarter, for about a week each time. She says it’s important to pick a typical week to record, and to use the method you’re most comfortablewith, whether it’s a simple notebook, a spreadsheet on your computer, or a productivityapp.

“Even though this is a good tool for finding out where you’re wasting time, it can also help you see that dreaded tasks you’ve been putting off actually don’t take as long as you think,” she says. “This is good for getting past procrastination.”

I conducted my first time log halfway through my project, and I think you may be a bit surprised by the results. But before getting to that, it’s time for one final challenge to help you lay the groundwork while you read the rest ofThe Productivity Project.

Estimated time to do challenge:About one minute every hour for at least one week

Energy/Focus Required:1/10

Value:9/10

Fun:3/10

What you’ll get out of it:An understanding of how well you manage the threeingredients of productivity, so you know your starting point and can make adjustments to get more done every day.

The fourth challenge I have for you will pay for itself many times over: track your energy to determine yourBPT, and keep a time log to evaluate how well you manage your time and attention.

Energy

If you want to truly observe your body’snatural rhythms, before keeping a log of how much energy you have, you should:

•Cut out caffeine,alcohol,sugar, and as many other stimulants as possible from your diet. If it takes you a few days to adjust, you may want to consider throwing out your first few days’ worth of data, because they may skew your results.

•Eat small, frequent meals throughout the day.

•If you can, wake up and fall asleep naturally, without the aid of analarm clock or smartphone.

Cutting out caffeine and alcohol is probably the most difficult thing I’ll ask you to do in one of these challenges, but to get a good measurement of when you naturally have the most energy, it’s almost essential. I see drinking alcohol as a way of borrowing energy from tomorrow; and because you invariably crash after a caffeine high, drinking caffeine is a way of borrowing energy from later on in the day. Toget a consistent reading on when you’re naturally the most productive, you should cut out both for your measurements. And though sugar can serve as a temporary boost every once in a while, from an energy and productivity standpoint, it’s not helpful in the long run.

I personally recommend cutting out all three starting a week before you track your energy levels. Your BPT doesn’t change much over time, and the knowledge of when you naturally have the most energy will pay dividends for years to come.

To track your energy levels, as well as your time, you simply need a sheet of paper that lists the hours of the day and the days of the week. To save you some time, I’ve put together a chart that has everything you need to track your time and energy levels for one week. Just head on over to the website for this book—productivityprojectbook.com—to download and print off the chart!

Time

Every hour, on the hour, in addition to noting how much energy you have (on a scale of 1 to 10), make a note of

•What you are doing.

•How many minutes you procrastinated over the hour (an estimate).

Here are a few tips I think you will find helpful for this challenge:

•In addition to tracking how you spend your time with a pen and paper, if you work a lot of time on the computer, there are some greatapps that will let you track how you spend time there, too. If you have the freedom to install programs on your work computer, I highly recommendRescueTime (Rescuetime.com—free; PC, Mac, and Android), and Toggl (Toggl.com—free; PC, Mac, iPhone, Android). RescueTime tracks your time for you automatically in the background, and Toggl lets you track your time manually.

•If you find yourself procrastinating, don’t worry—that’s normal. According to the procrastination researchers I have interviewed,everyone procrastinates at times—including some of the most renowned procrastination researchers from around the world. Don’t be too hard on yourself when you write down how long you procrastinate—and don’t be afraid to be honest.

•If the thought of tracking your time and energy for a week or more puts you off, try tracking your time and energy for just a few days. Once you begin to observe some patterns, I think you’ll be encouraged to pursue both further. Personally, I recommend tracking your time for a week, and your energy levels for two to three weeks if you can.

•Tracking your time and energy is tedious, I’ll grant you. But the return on both activities is huge—so much so that I still track both my time and energy every few months, even though, compared to my initial reading, the return is much smaller. I believe there is incredible value in this activity.

This exercise might be, in itself, enough to motivate you to reduce the amount of time that you waste onlow-impact tasks. But if it isn’t, don’t worry—the rest of this book will guide you through some of the best ways I’ve discovered to better manage your time, attention, and energy.

Now that we’ve laid the groundwork to becoming more productive, let me get to the one thing I’ve swept under the rug thus far in this book: the results of my first time tracking experiment.