Part Two

WASTING TIME

COZYING UP TO UGLY TASKS

Takeaway:Procrastination is human. The biggest reason your highest-impact tasks are so valuable is that they are often more intimidating; they almost always require moretime, attention, and energy than yourlower-impact tasks. They’re typically also more boring, frustrating, difficult, unstructured, and lacking in intrinsic rewards—which all act as triggers for procrastination.

Estimated Reading Time:16 minutes, 54 seconds

WASTING TIME

In October of 2013, after I conducted aproductivity experiment around watching 296TED Talks in a week, a staff member of the prestigious TED organization invited me to participate in an interview for its official blog.*1I was over the moon. I was about halfway into my yearlong experiment, people were starting to discover my website, and the interview was a huge coup. Along with other TED luminaries likeBill Clinton,Malcolm Gladwell,Jane Goodall, andBill Gates, I would be on the front page ofTED.com!

When my interview was posted a week later, I was excited all over again. My favorite part of it was the opening line, which read, “Chris Bailey might be the most productive man you’d ever hope to meet.”TED thought I was the most productive manever! That should go on the cover of my book, right?

That same week, I tracked how I spent my time as an experiment. What I discovered was humbling. Over the course of the week, after tracking how I spent every hour of every day (including how much time I spent procrastinating), I discovered that I spent:*2

•19 hours on reading and research

•16.5 hours writing

•4 hours conducting and participating in interviews

•8.5 hours doing maintenance-type tasks

•6 hours procrastinating

By pretty much any measure, my week was extraordinarily productive. TED organizers published their interview with me, I wrote 4,683 words, finished reading two books, and read countless articles on productivity. I also invested 37.5 hours into two of my highest-impact tasks. And there were no gaps between what I intended to accomplish and what I actually accomplished. As the icing on the cake, I had a ton of energy and focus throughout the week.

Yet I spentsix hoursputting off what I had intended to do—which didn’t include the time I spent taking breaks.

While I was excited to share what I learned in tracking my time, I ultimately decided against putting the results up on my blog. I’m revealing them for the first time in this book. I didn’t often shy away from being vulnerable during my project, and always wrote about the times I failed, but this time my pride got in the way. It stubbornly prevented me from saying anything that would take away from my newfound identity as the world’s most productive person.

But as it turns out, procrastinating isn’t something to be ashamed of. And here’s why.

*1TED, which stands for Technology, Entertainment, and Design, is a worldwide series of conferences where leaders in all three fields gather together to talk about their “ideas worth spreading.”

*2If you’re curious, over those five days I also spent 39.5 hours sleeping, 9 hours on household and personal tasks, 6 hours working out, 2.5 hours meditating, and 10.5 hours on leisure activities (mostly reading and spending time with friends).

“EVERYONE PROCRASTINATES”

One of the smartest decisions I made when I startedA Year ofProductivitywasblogging every day about what I learned from my research and experiments. As more and more people began to follow my approach to exploring productivity, I was able to use this growing attention to dive even deeper into what it takes to become more productive—such as interviewing experts likeTim Pychyl.

Tim Pychyl wrote the bestselling bookSolving the Procrastination Puzzle. He has been researching procrastination for more than twenty years. Tim walks with a spring in his step, exuding a zenlike calmness that’s not unlike the meditators I have interviewed for this book. His personality and demeanor, on the surface, seem incongruous with what one might expect of one of the world’s foremost authorities on procrastination.

What Tim said during our first conversation set me more at ease than anything I had heard in a long time: “Everyone procrastinates.” Procrastination is simply human nature.Piers Steel, the author ofThe Procrastination Equation, backs that up, explaining that “across scores of surveys, about 95 percent of people admit to procrastinating.” (The other 5 percent are lying.)

Naturally, different people procrastinate in different ways and amounts every day. Research shows that about 20 percent of people procrastinate chronically. But whether or not you’re a chronic procrastinator, you probably put things off more than you realize. My six hours over the course of a week may even be on the low end of the spectrum.According to a recentSalary.comsurvey, 31 percent of people openly admitted to wasting at least an hour every day, and 26 percent of people admitted to wasting two or more hoursevery day. And that’s only the time employees consciously wasted. Depending on your work, you may procrastinate for more than two hours every day. Pychyl found in one of his studies that the average student procrastinates fora third of his or her waking hours.

THE SIXTRIGGERS OF PROCRASTINATION

The science behind why we procrastinate is simple. One of my favorite pieces of research on the topic, which Tim Pychyl also participated in, found that there are a handful of attributes a task can have that make you more likely to procrastinate on it. (There are alsopersonality traits that make you more likely to procrastinate, but I’ll get to those in a bit. I personally prefer to focus on the tasks themselves, since a task is way easier to change than your personality. Plus, you’re great. Don’t ever change.)

It’s actually relatively straightforward: personality aside, the moreaversive (unattractive) a task or project is to you, the more likely you are to put it off. And there are six main task attributes that make procrastination more likely. Those are whether a task is one or more of the following:

•Boring

•Frustrating

•Difficult

•Unstructured or ambiguous

•Lacking in personal meaning

•Lacking in intrinsic rewards (i.e., it’s not fun or engaging)

The more of these attributes a task has, and the more intense these attributes are, the less attractive a task will be to you, and the more likely you’ll procrastinate on it.This is why you put off some tasks to the very last moment, like doing yourtaxes, in favor of doing other tasks, like watchingNetflix, which don’t set off nearly as many triggers.

Doing your taxes is one of the most boring, frustrating, difficult, and unstructured tasks there is, and if you’re like me, you probably don’t find it all that meaningful or fun. For most people, doing your taxes has all six procrastination triggers. Other commitments like visiting the doctor for a checkup, calling your mother, working from home, running a marathon, and writing a book also set off multiple procrastination triggers, which makes you more likely to put them off.

It’s important to think aboutwhyyou’re procrastinating. As Tim put it, “sometimesprocrastination is just a symptom that your life just doesn’t match what you’re interested in and…maybe you should do something else.”

The reason you feel so much less mental resistance to watching Netflix than you do with doing your taxes is Netflix is far less boring, frustrating, and difficult, and it’s more stimulating and structured. Netflix even shows a link to play the next episode of a series as you finish watching the current one! Because watching Netflix has almost no procrastination triggers, we don’t put it off.

The biggest reason your highest-impact tasks are so valuable is that they too are aversive; they almost always require more time, attention, and energy than your lower-impact tasks, and they’re usually more boring, frustrating, difficult, unstructured, and lacking in intrinsic rewards. They’re valuable and meaningful because they’re hard, and that’s why you get paid more than minimum wage to do them. This is a simple reality of not working in a factory: the more valuable your work, the more aversive it will be. This is also why becoming more productive can be so challenging; although every single person on Earth wants to get more done, accomplishing more involves taking on tasks that are more aversive.

Procrastination gets in the way of accomplishing more since it is, in its simplest form, a gap between your intention and action.

By the way, are you interested in gaining back 13.6 years of your life in an instant? Quit watching TV. According to Nielsen, the average American adult watches 5 hours and 4 minutes of television every single day.Assuming you live until eighty and start watching TV at ten, that adds up to 13.6yearsof your life.

NERDING OUT

Let’s look at what happens inside yourbrain as you procrastinate.

As you consider procrastinating on a task, a fascinating internal war rages on in your brain. Often, you go from justifying why it is okay towatch one more episode ofHouse of Cardsto thinking about the fact that you need to do your taxes; from being tempted to check Facebook orTwitter one more time to thinking about how you really need to get started on your report that’s due next Friday.

This back-and-forth is the result of two parts of your brain—your “limbic system” and “prefrontal cortex”—going to war with each other.

Your limbic system is the emotional, instinctual part of your brain that includes, among other things, your pleasure center.Evolutionarily speaking, the limbic is an old part of your brain—like an animal, it’s what makes you instinctual and pushes you to give in to emotions and temptations. This is the part of your brain that tries to tempt you to put off doing your taxes to watch a few episodes ofHouse of Cards.

Your prefrontal cortex is the logical part of your brain that’s fighting to get you to do your taxes. It’s responsible for, among other things, logic, reason, and keeping your longer-term goals in mind. It’s also what motivated you to pick up this book. If you’ve done the productivity experiments I’ve mentioned so far, it’s because your prefrontal cortex won out; if you’ve put them off and simply read on, your limbic system won out.

This back-and-forth between your emotional limbic system and logical prefrontal cortex is what leads to the decisions you make throughout the day. It’s also what makes you human. If your prefrontal cortex won out 100 percent of the time, all your decisions would be perfectly logical, and you would be akin to a Vulcan from theStar Trekfranchise; basing your decisions on pure logic and reason, without consideration of your emotions or the emotions of others. If your limbic system won out 100 percent of the time, you would be no different from an animal who makes every decision on instinct.

In every decision we make, either our limbic system or prefrontal cortex gains the upper hand. Our limbic system wins out when we go home with the cute girl at the bar, don’t resist ordering a donut with our morning coffee, or when we procrastinate. Tim often refers to procrastination as “giving in to feel good,” and if you look at a brain scan of someone who is procrastinating, you’ll see that on a neurological level, that’s exactlywhat happens. The prefrontal cortex surrenders to the limbic system so that we can feel good in the short term.

But our prefrontal cortex wins out a lot of the time, too. It is the reason we set aside money for retirement, hit the gym after work to get into shape, overcome the six triggers of procrastination, and read about productivity. It’s the part of your brain that is constantly fighting for you to achieve your long-term goals, instead of the goals that are only pleasurable in the short term. And it is nearly impossible to become more productive without a strong prefrontal cortex.

Whenever we think about whether we should work on an ugly task, our limbic system and prefrontal cortex battle it out, and then we either procrastinate or we tackle the dreaded task.*3

But there’s just one issue with this battle between the limbic system and prefrontal cortex: the deck is stacked.

*3I’m simplifying things a tad here—the brain is an intricate system that we’re only beginning to understand, and any generalized statement of how the brain works won’t account for its complexity and beauty. For example, the frontal cortex handles some emotional processing, and according toJonathan Haidt, the author ofThe Happiness Hypothesis,has “enabled a great expansion of emotionality in humans.”In a very general sense, though, your limbic system is emotional, and your prefrontal cortex is logical.

REGAINING CONTROL OVER YOUR BRAIN

So far, I have painted a picture in which your limbic system and prefrontal cortex are in constant battle with each other. Although that’s true as far as procrastination is concerned, the rest of the time the two systems work together in incredible ways. Since the two systems are responsible for both logic and emotion, they’re jointly responsible for some of the most remarkable innovations known to humankind—including language, the printing press, the lightbulb, the wheel, and the internet. Logic created the wheel, but out of a desire to create a better and more modern world. Plus, the first inventor of the wheel probably got some mad props from his bros and scored well with the ladies afterward. But that is just my subjective guess (not based on any evolutionary psychology whatsoever).

The interplay of your prefrontal cortex and limbic system is also what lets you pursue things that are pleasurable, engaging, and meaningful, like learning to play the cello, saving up to hike theInca Trail, climbing a mountain, volunteering, building strong relationships, pursuing long-term goals, and following your passion.

While our limbic system is essential, much of productivity has to do with building up a strong prefrontal cortex, one that can show your limbic system who’s boss when it needs to and smack down impulses like checking youremail or Facebook one more time in favor ofworking on higher-impact tasks. While we need to keep our limbic system happy, it is impossible to invest in our achievements, relationships, and values without a strong prefrontal cortex.

But that’s easier said than done. While the interplay between our prefrontal cortex and limbic system is what makes ushuman, our prefrontal cortex is also much weaker than our limbic system.The limbic system has evolved over millions of years, while the prefrontal cortex has been around for thousands.

In the exact same way that the most productive people learn to step back from working on autopilot, the most productive people learn to use their prefrontal cortexes more than their limbic systems.

The part of studying the brain that I find fascinating is that even though these types of battles occur in our brain thousands of times every day, we usually aren’t aware of them. Just as 90 percent of an iceberg sits underwater, our mind is only able to consciously observe a fraction of what’s going on in our brain—the rest is hidden within the depths of our unconsciousness. This is why productivity can be so powerful, because you can harness this power by combining the science of how you think and act with the intention of learning how to accomplish more.

TILTING THE SCALE

I’ve designed this chapter to be a bit longer than the others for a very specific reason: to ignite your prefrontal cortex. As you’re reading these words, your prefrontal cortex is on fire, processing the meaning behind the words you’re reading right now, while connecting these words to what you already know.Igniting your prefrontal cortex is, conveniently, what you have to do to defeat your limbic system and work on your highest-impact tasks.

For me, although procrastinating for six hours in a given week is probably on the low end of the procrastination spectrum, I wanted to squeeze every ounce of productivity out of my time. I wanted to get that number as low as I possibly could. After I discovered the source of procrastination—my limbic system bullying my prefrontal cortex—I did all I could to give my prefrontal cortex the advantage the next time my limbic system tempted me to give in to feeling good.

After you have identified your most important tasks and have formed an intention to work on them, youwillprocrastinate on them, even though you likely have a stronger prefrontal cortex than most.

But there are several strategies that work wonders for turning the tables on procrastination. In fact, with enough forethought, it’s entirely possible to make doing yourtaxes as sexy a task as watching an entire season ofHouse of Cards.

EXTREME MAKEOVER: TAXES EDITION

Oh @#%*@#!, look at the calendar! Your taxes are due in a month! And you haven’t even thought about getting started on them!

But they can wait until tomorrow, right?

The moment you notice your mind having an internal debate about whether or not to work on a task, or you begin to notice yourself saying things like “I’ll do them later,” “I just don’t feel like it right now,” or worst of all, “I’ll do them when I have more time,” it’s a signal that thetask before you is an aversive task, and that you need to make doing it much more attractive.*4

Because doing taxes is such an aversive task, it has created the entiretax preparation industry, which in theUnited States alone employs an estimated 320,000 people. And it’s no wonder: if completing your taxes were as simple as clicking a button, the industry wouldn’t exist.According toIntuit—the makers ofTurboTax, the software program that, among many others, makes doing your taxes less boring, frustrating, difficult, and so on—“nearly 1/3 of taxpayersprocrastinate on filing their taxes.”

My method of choice for making my tax task less ugly is to hire someone to do them for me. Every year I hire a business to do my taxes, and for a couple hundred bucks I basically buy back hours of my time and attention so I can level up and focus on higher-impact tasks and projects. It’s tax season right now, and instead of collecting receipts, crunching numbers, and figuring out what I can and can’t write off under my business, I’m writing these words. But let’s assume that hiring a business to do them for you is out, and you have to file them yourself, on paper.

Just thinking about doing your taxes, maybe your limbic system is resisting reading on, or dreading these next few paragraphs. So let’s make over doing your taxes so they’re just as attractive as watchingNetflix.

By seeing what triggers procrastination, and then making aplan to flip those triggers, doing your taxes becomes more attractive. If I found myself putting off doing my taxes, I might sit down and make a plan to change those triggers. For example, if the trigger is:

•Boring:I go to my favorite café for an afternoon on Saturday to do my taxes over a fancy drink while doing some people watching.

•Frustrating:I bring a book to the same café, and set a timer on my phone to limit myself to working on my taxes for thirty minutes—and only work for longer if I’m on a roll and feel like going on.

•Difficult:I research the tax process to see what steps I need to follow, and what paperwork I need to gather. And I visit the café during my Biological Prime Time, when I’ll naturally have more energy.

•Unstructured or Ambiguous:I make a detailed plan from my research that has thevery next stepsI need to take to do them.

•Lacking in Personal Meaning:If I expect to get a refund, think about how much money I will get back, and make a list of the meaningful things I’ll spend that money on.

•Lacking in IntrinsicRewards:For every fifteen minutes I spend on my taxes, I set aside $2.50 to treat myself or reward myself in some meaningful way for reaching milestones.

Okay, maybe doing your taxes will never be as sexy as watching Netflix. But I think we came close, right?

*4By the way, I have something quick to get off my chest: “I don’t have time for that” is the biggest excuse out there. When someone says they “don’t have time” for something, what they’re really saying is that a task isn’t as important or attractive as whatever else they have on their plate. Every person gets twenty-four hours of time every day and gets to spend those twenty-four hours however he or she chooses. But I digress.

THREE MORE WAYS TOREGAIN CONTROL OVER YOUR BRAIN

Flipping a task’s triggers tackles two birds with one stone: it simultaneously makes a task less aversive by disabling itsprocrastination triggers, while it readies your prefrontal cortex to battle your brain’s limbic system. If you need to give your prefrontal cortex an even bigger shove, here are three more ways to regain control and work on your most aversive tasks.

1. Create a procrastination list

It’s actually possible to procrastinate productively. When you make a list of meaningful and high-impact tasks to do the next time you procrastinate, you can remain productive while your prefrontal cortex warms up. During my project, I often found myself putting off reading long, tedious research papers. So I made a procrastination list that included items like writing and sending importantemails, organizing folders onmy computer, and tracking expenses related to my project. I think it’s also helpful to give yourself a choice between working on only two tasks: the task that you’re tempted to procrastinate on, and another task that’s high return.

2. List thecosts

Listing every single cost of putting something off is one of my favorite ways to get my prefrontal cortex fired up. It’s a simple tactic, but it gives you a much better shot at winning out.

3. Just get started

Note that I didn’t write “just do it.” If you have a big, aversive task like cleaning your basement, simply getstartedon it. Try setting atimer for just fifteen minutes, after which you will stop cleaning and begin to work on something else. If you feel like going on after you get started, by all means do, but if you don’t, don’t worry about it. Every single time I have simply got started on something, even if just for a few minutes, tasks have rarely been as aversive as I had imagined.Rita Emmett, the author ofThe Procrastinator’s Handbook, summed this up well in what she labeled Emmett’s law: “The dread of doing a task uses up more time and energy than doing the task itself.”

PROGRESS

Over the ensuing months, whenever I noticed myself trying to justify my way out of a task, I used that as a trigger to fire up my prefrontal cortex. According toTim Pychyl, procrastination is at its most fundamental level, “a visceral, emotional reaction” to a task that sets off multiple procrastination triggers.

Firing up your prefrontal cortex is the best way out.

Since my firsttime log, I wanted to get to the bottom of how to waste less time every day—a tumultuous journey, but one that taught me a lot along the way. At the time of my most recent time log, I was in themiddle of writing this book. Writing a book is a task that, for me, sets off even more procrastination triggers than my project did; it’s one of the least structured and intrinsically rewarding tasks out there (especially for a business-minded guy like myself), and it can be insanely boring, frustrating, and difficult at times. But whenever I have been tempted to procrastinate writing this over the last several months, the first thing I did was fire up my prefrontal cortex.

And it worked. Here’s what my most recent time log looked like:

•17.5 hours reading and research

•15 hours writing

•5.5 hours conducting and participating in interviews

•2.5 hours doing maintenance-type tasks

•1 hour procrastinating

Much better, to my relief.

A part of me was tempted to write that I didn’t procrastinate at all, and though that may have made for a better story to end this chapter with, it simply wouldn’t be true.

Sometimes our prefrontal cortex wins out.

Time required:6 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:8/10

Value:8/10

Fun:7/10

What you’ll get out of it:The ugliest tasks in your work and personal life will become much more appealing, and you will waste less time when you work on them. This will help you free up even more time for your highest-impact and most meaningful tasks.

If you want to become more productive, you simply have to work on your highest-impact tasks more often. But when you do, you’re also going to procrastinate more often because the moreaversive a task is to you, the more likely you’ll put it off. The next time you notice yourself putting off a task, use that as a trigger to think hard about what procrastination triggers set you off.

Then, write those triggers down and make a plan to flip them. And if you need to fire up your prefrontal cortex even further, create a procrastination list, list the costs of putting off the task, or simply get started on it.

Ironically, the tasks that will make you the most productive are also the most aversive. Fighting the emotional urge you have to put them off can go a long way toward making you more productive.

Working on more aversive tasks is essential if you want to become more productive. Of course, if you constantly find yourself procrastinating, that may be a strong signal that you need to seek out a different job. Who wants to only work on stuff that is boring, frustrating, difficult, ambiguous, unstructured, and lacking in pleasure and meaning every day?

MEET YOURSELF…FROM THEFUTURE

Takeaway:The more you see your “future self” (you, only in the future) as a stranger, the more likely you are to give your future self the same workload that you would give a stranger, and put things off to tomorrow. It’s important to get in touch with your future self, by doing things like sending aletter to future you, creating a “future memory,” or even downloading an app that will show you what you look like in the future.

Estimated Reading Time:7 minutes, 5 seconds

AN AWKWARD LETTER

About one week ago, I received a letter in the mail. Receiving an actual letter is odd itself, but to make things even odder, it was from myself.

Here is the letter in its entirety, which I sent to myself eight months ago:

Hi man,

Right now you’re kind of at a crossroads—unsure of what career, money, life, and other choices to make. I’d like to fast-forward several months to see how things turn out, I’m not going to lie.

But right now, you’re surrounded by eight brand-new friends, and you’re happy—in the fray of uncertainty. Everything isgood, because you’re surrounded by people you care for, and that care for you.

I’m not sure how things will be withArdyn (my guess: pretty good at this rate), but you were happy to hear her voice today. I’m not sure how healthy you’ll be, but right now you’re in the best shape of your life. I’m also not sure (sense a common theme here?) how happy, positive, mindful, or anything else you’ll be, but I guess that’s the beauty of it all. It’s a cliché, but you believe this: happiness is nothing more than coming to terms with how things change. I hope you’re happy and doing great. At this rate, I know you are.

Love,

Chris

For the last five years I’ve volunteered for an organization namedCamp Quality. Camp Quality is a worldwide charity that puts on weeklongsummer camps designed to help kids who suffer from cancer feel like kids again. Volunteers are paired up with a camper, and we hang out with them for the week, and every once in a while throughout the year.

In addition to the weeklong camps, the organization puts on a yearly four-day leadership camp for teenagers who suffered from cancer when they were kids. The camp lets people like myself share what we’ve learned so the campers can navigate some of the teen experiences we’ve already gone through.

One of the activities at last year’s leadership camp—whether you were a camper or a volunteer—was to write a letter to your future self. Even though my letter is a little awkward to look back on, I still remember the activity being valuable, for a very specific reason: we hardly ever think about our future selves.

THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN YOU ANDTAYLOR SWIFT

If you were to lie down in an fMRI machine—a machine that measures yourbrain activity by looking at changes in blood flow—and you thoughtabout your future self and then thought about a total stranger (like Taylor Swift), you would notice something peculiar when you looked at the two scans: they wouldn’t be all that different.

Hal Hershfield, a professor at UCLA’sAnderson School of Management, has conducted this exact study and found that while the average participant’s brain scan of his or herpresentself and a stranger’s scan varied quite a bit, the participant’s brain scan of his or herfutureself and a total stranger’s scan were almost identical.

This has a huge impact on your productivity: the more you see yourself like a stranger, the more likely you are to give your future self the same workload that you would give a stranger, and the more likely you are to put things off to tomorrow—for your future self to do.

Since you see yourself from the future as no different from a stranger, you also see her or him as less tired, busy, and more focused and disciplined than the version of you that’s reading this book. And while in some ways that will be true—particularly as you begin to implement the tactics in this book—you will obviously have a lot more in common with yourself today than with a total stranger.

The more disconnected you are from your future self, the more likely you are to do things like:

Give your future self more work than you would give your present self

Agree to unproductive or pointless meetings far off in the future

Keep ten uninspiring documentaries around on your PVR that you’ll “get around to watching”

Continually transfer aversive tasks to tomorrow’s to-do list

Save less money forretirement

If I asked if you wanted to sign up for a marathon that’s ten weeks from now, chances are you wouldn’t agree to it; that would require a ton of work over the next several months to build up to running 26.2 miles. But if I asked you if you wanted to sign up for a marathon that’s two and a halfyearsfrom now, though you still may not agree, chances are you’ll feel a lot less resistance to the idea. You’re a lot more likely to be attractedto the grand idea of running a marathon than you are to think about what your future self will have to do to get there.

Surprisingly, though our limbic system takes over when we procrastinate, the prefrontal cortex is responsible for us not taking our future selves into account when we make decisions.

GETTING IN TOUCH

To understand how we think about our future selves, HalHershfield conducted a fascinating experiment: he teamed up with professional animators to set up a simulator that showed participants a live 3-D model of what they will look like when they retire. If a student moved even slightly, opened her or his mouth to speak, or turned one way or another, the model did the exact same thing, in real time.

After Hershfield asked students a bunch of questions in the simulator, he gave them a task: allocate $1,000 between their present-day selves, and for themselves at retirement.After the experiment, he discovered something remarkable: students who stepped into the simulator savedmore than twice as muchfor retirement than those who didn’t.

“It’s so easy to commit your future self to things your current self wouldn’t want to do,” he says. “We call this a ‘planning fallacy.’ ”

He explains that you have the best of intentions when you make commitments for your future self, but that your future self usually gets the short end of the stick. But it’s part of our biological makeup.

“Evolutionarily speaking, when you could be eaten by a lion at any moment, saving for the future doesn’t make much sense,” he says.

But, it’s easier to travel through time and get in touch with your future self than you think.*

I’ve already revealed my favorite way to get in touch with my future self: through theRule of 3. In the Rule of 3, your future self takes center stage. By mentally fast-forwarding to the end of the day and thinking about what you want to accomplish, you activate the planning centers in your prefrontal cortex,whileyou also step into the shoes of your futureself. And you do the same when you plan out your three accomplishments at the start of every week.

After coming across Hershfield’s research, I conducted a number of experiments to get in touch with myfuture self. Here are my favorite three:

•Fire upAgingBooth.While hiring a programmer to create a 3-D virtual reality simulator is probably out of your price range, I personally love an app called AgingBooth, which transforms a picture of your face into what you will look like in several decades. There are also other apps like it, likeMerrill Edge’s web app that shows you a live avatar of what you’ll look like at retirement (faceretirement.merrilledge.com). AgingBooth is my favorite of them all, and it’s available for both Android and iOS, and it’s free. On the website for this book (productivityprojectbook.com), you can see what to expect out of the app—I’ve framed a picture of myself that hangs above my computer in my office, where I see it every day. Visitors are usually freaked out.

•Send aletter to your future self.Like the letter I wrote at camp, writing and sending a letter to yourself in the future is a great way to bridge the gap between you and your future self. I frequently useFutureMe.orgto send emails to myself in the future, particularly when I see myself being unfair to future me.

•Create afuture memory.I’m not a fan of hocus-pocusvisualizations, so I hope this doesn’t sound like one. In her brilliant bookThe Willpower Instinct,Kelly McGonigal recommends creating a memory of yourself in the future—like one where you don’t put off a report you’re procrastinating on, or one where you read ten interesting books because you staved off the temptation of binge-watching three seasons ofHouse of CardsonNetflix. Simply imagining a better, more productive version of yourself down the line has been shown to be enough to motivate you to act in ways that are helpful for your future self.

At the end of most winters, I leave a $20 bill in my pocket, which I completely forget about until I reach into my winter coat pocket the next year. While it’s important to not be unfair to your future self, one of the awesome things you can do is treat your future self—whether that means saving for the future, saying no to eating pizza tonight, working out, learning calculus, putting on sunscreen, flossing, reading more—or leaving some money in your coat pocket to find six months later. You’ll feel incredible later on.

*By the way, I see you’re reading this from the future! What’s it like?

Time required:10 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:4/10

Value:7/10

Fun:9/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll become less likely to put things off until tomorrow, foisting them on your future self, because you no longer see your future self as a stranger.

When you put something off or waste time, you’re almost always being unfair to your future self.

Before you get in touch with your future self, it’s worth pausing for a few seconds to think about how tight you two are in the first place. According to Hershfield, everyone identifies with their future self differently. He calls how closely you identify with future you your “future-self continuity.”Before getting in touch with your future self, ask yourself: Where do you sit on the chart below?

After you have identified where you fall, if you find yourself a bit estranged from your future self, invest in connecting with future you, either by downloading an app like AgingBooth, sending aletter to future you through a site likeFutureMe.org, or if you’re feeling adventurous, by imagining your future self and creating a future memory.

Trust me: You’ll thank yourself later.

WHY THEINTERNET IS KILLING YOURPRODUCTIVITY

Takeaway:The internet can destroy your productivity if you’re not careful. The best way I have found to prevent the internet from wasting my time has been to simplydisconnect from it when working on a high-impact or ugly task, and to disconnect as much as possible throughout the day. After getting over the initial withdrawal, the calm and productivity you’ll experience will be unlike anything else.

Estimated Reading Time:9 minutes, 40 seconds

TECHNOLOGY IS FREAKING AWESOME

The very first productivity experiment I conducted during my project—which was also one of the most memorable ones—involved using my smartphone for just an hour a day, for three months.

Throughout the experiment, traveling around with a notepad in one pocket and myiPhone in the other, I meticulously noted whenever I used my phone (which usually happened in fifteen-minute chunks of time) so I wouldn’t go over the hour limit. I love running experiments like this—where I remove an element from my work and observe how my routines, habits, and rituals are affected—because I can observe how certain aspects of my work, like using my smartphone and constantly being connected, either help or hinder my productivity.

Whilehumans have evolved at quite a consistent rate over the last 2.5 million years, in the last couple of centuries technology hasprogressedat a hugely accelerated rate.Moore’s law, which says that the number of transistors on a chip will double every two years, has held true for more than fifty years, and today’s run-of-the-mill smartphone packs more punch into 200 grams than an entire multiroom supercomputer did just a few decades ago. And humanity has, of course, advanced alongside this revolution. While the averagelife expectancy throughout the world hovered at twenty-five years from 5000 BCE through 1820, after theindustrial revolution, our life expectancy began accelerating. It now sits at eighty years in the United States.

But I would argue that of all the technology we have, the internet has changed our life the most. The internet, along with the technology it has inspired, has flattened the world and connected more people than anything that came before it. Plus, when you tap your smartphone a very specific way, a pizza man shows up at your door twenty minutes later. Wrap your head about this: if you were to send today’s iPhone back in time to two decades ago, people would think you were a witch, because the device would be indistinguishable from magic. Try to imagine what internet device will exist ten or twenty years from now that is so advanced that if we brought it back to today, you would think the same.

(This is the kind of stuff that goes on in my head all day long. Please send help.)

As far as human history is concerned, theinternet and the technologies it spawned are a godsend. But because humans—and the newer parts of our brain, like the prefrontal cortex—have continued to evolve in a linear fashion alongside these technologies, at least as far as productivity is concerned, it’s made us unprepared to deal with how disruptive those technologies can be to our work.

The internet can absolutely obliterate your productivity if you’re not careful.

THE ZEN OFDISCONNECTING

A huge part of me is relieved that I didn’t keep atime log before my smartphone experiment. Working deliberately is hard enough without the internet, and if I had to wager a guess, I would say I procrastinatedten hours or more each week before actively disconnecting every day. And that wouldn’t be above the norm. Once you account for how much time you spend online, how often your work gets interrupted when you’re online (Chapter 19), and the inefficiencies that come along with multitasking online (Chapter 20), it’s safe to say that the internet is one of the biggest disruptions of our productivity.

The internet is so distracting that I’ve dedicated an entire part of this book to dealing with thedistractions it sends our way (this page). Our brains simply aren’t equipped to deal with how distracting it is; if they were, we wouldn’t be drowning in a sea of emails, notifications, phone calls, and buzzes, vibrations, and sounds. But the internet also impacts your productivity in a second way that’s, on the surface, pretty easy to overlook: every day, it leads you to waste an insane amount of time.

Although the first few weeks of my smartphone experiment were admittedly quite rough—I would often habitually reach for my phone in my pocket when it wasn’t there, or feel a phantom vibration on my leg even when my phone was turned off—I quickly settled into a new equilibrium and got accustomed to how peaceful I felt when I disconnected. I still used my laptop to write, do research, and conduct interviews, but every day I felt progressively more liberated from the shiny, black rectangle that used to be attached at my hip throughout the day. After I survived the first few weeks of the experiment, I felt as though I had cleared a bend; a whole new expanse of focus and clarity opened up for me, and I was able to dive much deeper into what I had to get done every day.

While the internet is fun and stimulating, it will almost always try to tempt you away from working on the highest-impact tasks you identified in Part One. Compared to your high-impact tasks, the internet is drop-dead sexy: it’s one of the least boring, frustrating, and difficult things out there, and it’s also insanely rewarding, and in an immediate way—a deadly combination for fostering addiction and procrastination. Oh, and structure! The internet has seeped into almost every area of our life, so much so that it’s almost impossible to go a day without it. Despite how good your intentions at the beginning of the day, next to the internet, your high-impact tasks often don’t stand a chance.

The best way I have found to prevent the internet from wasting mytime has been to simply disconnect from it when working on a demanding or unappealing task. Although that isn’t always realistic, every person I know has periods of time every day when he or she can disconnect. After getting over the withdrawal that will set in over the first few weeks, the calm and productivity you’ll experience will be unlike anything else.

As I write these words, my smartphone is in another room, and the computer I’m writing these very words on is totally disconnected from the internet. It’s just past 11 a.m. I woke up naturally just before 7 this morning, and over the last four hours I’ve been connected to the internet for a total of an hour. It’s not that I dislike the internet—just the opposite, the internet is one of my favorite things on the planet. I simply value my productivity too much to stay connected all the time, especially when I’m working on something important.

A recent study fromIDC, a U.S. market research company, found that 80 percent of eighteen- to forty-four-year-olds check their smartphones within the first fifteen minutes of waking up. I used to do this, too, except I took the ritual up several notches. After I woke up, I would immediately reach for my phone and then mindlessly bounce around between my favorite apps in a stimulation-fueled feedback loop for about thirty minutes, continuously bouncing around betweenTwitter, email, Facebook,Instagram, and several news websites until I snapped out of my trance.

Today, my morning couldn’t be more different, or more productive. Every day I shut my smartphone completely off between 8 p.m. and 8 a.m.—one of my favorite daily rituals—so I can ease into and out of each day without wasting valuable time. This is especially powerful at the end of the day, when I have less willpower to resist distractions. And whenever I can, I switch my smartphone and laptop into airplane mode to hunker down on my most unattractive and high-impact tasks.

The internet is arguably the most powerful thing we have ever invented, and in the coming years and decades it will continue to shape the way we live and work in ways we can’t imagine. But despite its power, and its ability to serve you a never-ending stream of kitten pictures at your beck and call, as far as productivity is concerned it’s a dish that’s best served in small doses.

THE WORLD’S LARGEST CANDY STORE

In the sameSalary.comsurvey where 26 percent of people surveyed openly admitted to wasting at least two hours every day, participants named the internet as their biggest overall time waster by a massive margin.(The runners-up: too many meetings and conference calls; dealing with annoying coworkers; and returning pointless emails.) But while this figure may not surprise you, maybe the most damning stat comes from another studyTim Pychyl conducted, where he discovered that participants spent an average of47 percentof their time online procrastinating. In his book, he calls that figure a “conservative estimate.”

It’s easy to see why we waste so much time online: the internet is basically the world’s largest candy store for yourlimbic system. With every tap and click, your limbic system receives a steady stream of stimulation. AsNicholas Carr put it in his eye-opening bookThe Shallows: What the Internet Is Doing to Our Brains, “The net engages all of our senses,” and to make matters worse, “it engages them simultaneously.” Our hands are engaged as we tap our smartphones, or as we type and move our mouse across our desk. Our ears are engaged with the sounds of our keyboard and mouse, and with the sounds that come out of the speakers in front of us. And our eyes are continually stimulated as brand-new text, images, and videos appear on screen. The internet hijacks your limbic system by overwhelming it. Take it from me: I’ve been meditating every day for the past six years, and even I find it hard to be mindful against the mind-numbing allure of the internet.

LEVELING UP

Though studies like Tim’s show us how much time we waste every day on the internet, they don’t account for one more huge impact on your productivity: the internet tempts us to work onlower-impact tasks. Though we are technicallyworkingwhen we do things like continually check our email, we’re not as productive, because we don’t accomplish as much through those tasks. Disconnecting doesn’t only prevent you fromwasting time; it also prevents you from being tempted to work on lower-impact tasks that live on the internet, like email,instant messaging, and checkingsocial media.

This makesdisconnecting from the internet doubly important: disconnecting not only lets you reclaim the time (and attention) you waste mindlessly, it also makes it easier to focus on your higher-impact tasks.

As I stepped away from the internet candy store, I discovered that without the constant temptations I automatically worked more on my higher-impact tasks. While I wasted less time and was distracted a lot less, I also stopped checking my email so often, quit refreshing Twitter, and found myself doing things like picking up a book, planning for an interview, or writing articles for my site. When I finished work for the day, whenever I stayed disconnected, I found myself doing things like meditating or making tea for my girlfriend, to fill the hole in my schedule where previously I had been mindlessly wasting time online. And if I found I was tired after work, I actually took steps tocultivate my energy levels (Part Seven), instead of switching into autopilot mode.

Disconnecting made my work and home lives more boring at first—my limbic system was accustomed to the constant sugar rush of the internet candy store. It took me a few weeks to adjust to the new, lower level of stimulation. But after I adjusted, I had a lot more time and attention for what was actually important.

WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT

Unless you’re a cocaine-fueled stock trader, the internet is probably the most stimulating element of your workday. At the risk of sounding like a broken record, of the threeingredients of productivity—time, attention, and energy—your time is the most limited—there is no way to get more of it. Disconnecting from the internet might sound dismaying—and I’ll be honest, at first it is—but it’s also one of the best things you can do for your productivity. Disconnecting won’t only lead you to waste less time; it will also let you focus on the highest-return and most meaningful tasks in your work and life.

Research shows that of all the character traits we have, impulsivenessis the one that is most highly correlated with procrastination. The more impulsive you are, the more you procrastinate, because your limbic system is that much stronger than your prefrontal cortex.(Piers Steel, who wroteThe Procrastination Equation, calls impulsiveness the “cornerstone of procrastination” and mentions that “without impulsiveness, there wouldn’t be such a thing as chronic procrastination.”) Although firing up your prefrontal cortex—either by breaking down an aversive task or connecting with your future self—is a great way to overcome procrastination, an equally great way to quit wasting so much time is to eliminate time wasters in the first place. Disconnecting from the internet is my favorite way to do that, and it will make you more productive than you think.

From my experience, to become more productive, it’s important to see the internet as a nicety—not a necessity.

Time required:30 minutes

Energy/Focus Required:1/10

Value:10/10

Fun:4/10

What you’ll get out of it:You’ll waste much less time and find yourself working on your higher-impact and meaningful tasks more often, both at work and at home.

Here is my simple challenge for you for this chapter: disconnect from theinternet for thirty minutes tomorrow. Whether that means putting your phone on airplane mode as you eat dinner with your significant other, disconnecting fromWi-Fi as you work on one of your three daily tasks, or disconnecting when you have less energy so you’re not tempted to waste time—disconnect, and observe how much work you get done. After you observe how much work you get done when you disconnect, my guess is you’ll use this strategy a ton. You may even be tempted to implement a nightly shutoff ritual.

It’s not always easy to observe when you’re surfing the internet on autopilot, but at some point—when you snap back to attention as you find yourself staring at someone’s twenty-seventh profile picture on Facebook—you will realize that you are. When you notice yourself surfing on autopilot, I’ve found it helpful to use that as a trigger to disconnect. This will prevent you from wasting more time, and let you ease back into work mode, and step back from what you’re doing to work more deliberately.

A word to the wise, though: when you disconnect, you may feel a bit bored as your brain adjusts to the new lower level of stimulation. That’s simply your limbic system begging for the internet high that being online used to give you.

To waste less time, don’t listen to it.