Part Eight

THEFINAL STEP

THE FINAL STEP

Estimated Reading Time:21 minutes, 59 seconds

TAKING IT EASY

Over the course of my project, I discovered something curious whenever I pushed myself to get more done: it was almost impossible to push myself to become more productive without being hard on myself at the same time.

Frankly, this is the downside to working on your productivity. When you do it wrong (and I have), and you’re hard on yourself in the process, you end up less happy than when you started. When most of us invest in our productivity to increase our sense of well-being, odds are that goes against why you want to be more productive in the first place.

Investing in your productivity is a worthwhile goal, but life is too short to not be kind to yourself in the process.

But there is good news: research shows thatproductivity and happiness are in sync. In fact, the happier you are, the more productive you will become. According to psychologist and happiness researcherShawn Achor, who wrote the bestselling bookThe Happiness Advantage, when your brain is happier, it “performs significantly better than it does at negative, neutral, or stressed. Your intelligence rises, yourcreativityrises, [and] your energy levels rise.”In fact, in his research he’s found that happier people are31 percent more productive, have 37 percent better sales figures, have better, more secure jobs, are also better at keeping their jobs, are more resilient, and have less burnout.

His research illustrates a profound idea: investing in your happiness and being kind to yourself can have a huge impact on your productivity.

So far, I’ve done my best to give you ways of being kind to yourself as you invest in your productivity—in fact, many of the tactics in this bookthemselvesare ways of being kind to yourself as you strive to get more done. When you set daily and weekly intentions that are realistic and not too hard to achieve, you’ll be motivated to achieve them. When you accommodate the way your brain operates, it becomes infinitely easier to beat procrastination and quit wasting time. When you consider your future self when making decisions, you don’t burden the future you with responsibilities that you won’t be able to handle. When you clear attentional space to think, you give yourself more clarity and feel less pressure. Making small, incremental improvements, rewarding yourself, finding your resistance level, working mindfully, and cultivating your focus and energy levels are all ways of taking it easy on yourself and having fun as you invest in your productivity.

Over the course of my project, I discovered a number of fun ways to take it easy on myself as I invested in my productivity, often after unnecessarily beating myself up for not accomplishing the goals I set. Oddly enough, you mayfeelless productive—or if you’re like me, even guilty—as you become kinder to yourself. But doing so will allow you to accomplish more at the end of the day because you’ll continue to stay motivated.

These tactics serve as the perfect chaser to the last twenty-five chapters, and I can’t think of a better way to endThe Productivity Project. If you care about productivity, being kind to yourself is crucial. Here are nine of the best ways I’ve found to be kind to yourself in the process.

1. Disconnect from productivity more often

As a general rule, you should be taking morebreaks than you are now—that includes breaks throughout the day, and breaks from work in general.I’ve listed this one first because it’s easily the most important of the bunch: taking too few breaks can absolutely shatter your productivity. The more breaks I took during my project, the more energy and focus I had, and the less often I became fatigued. Thebenefits are innumerable and incredible: breaks help you work more mindfully and deliberately, come up with new ideas, flip into mind-wandering mode, reflect on your work, see the meaning in what you do, and ultimately make you more productive. One study found that the ideal break length for productivity is seventeen minutes for every fifty-two minutes you work, and while I don’t buy that number completely—everyone is programmed differently—I buy the idea behind it.You should take breaks a lot more frequently than you do now.

One study from theUniversity of Toronto looked at the link between breaks and productivity; it found that when we feel low on energy, it’s because we have a limited amount of physiological energy in our brain. According toJohn Trougakos, the study’s coauthor, “All efforts to control behavior, to perform and to focus draw on that pool of psychological energy.Once that energy source is depleted, we become less effective at everything that we do.” Completely separating from your work—whether throughout the day or in general—helps you replenish that pool of energy. I break for at least fifteen minutes every hour, because when I don’t, I notice a drop in how much energy and focus I have.

For a few great break activities, flip tothis page,where I’ve listed the best stress-relief activities. They let you recharge, destress, and have fun as you take a step back from being productive.

2. Recall three things you’re grateful for

In his research, Shawn Achor has encountered a number of ways you can actually train your brain to think happier. In addition to meditation and exercise—which Shawn is a huge advocate for—my favorite two tactics of his are recalling three things you’re grateful for, andjournaling one positive experience you had at the end of each day. As Shawn told me,recalling three things you’re grateful for every day is powerful because “as you consciously practice scanning for positives, your brain gets better at it and it retains the new pattern of unconsciously continually scanning the world for the good.” It’s not the gratitude as much as it is “the ability to scan your [life] for positives that makes the habit so effective.” Every night, even after the toughest days, I write down the three biggest things I’m grateful for from that day, or if that’s too hard, three things I’m grateful for in general. For something that takes only a minute or two, I’ve found the effects of this tactic to be absolutely profound.

3. Journal about a positive experience you had

According to Shawn, neurologically speaking, when you journal—or ifjournaling isn’t your thing, talk about—a positive experience you had at the end of each day, “your brain stamps it as meaningful.” Over time, doing this helps you train your brain to think happier by letting you recall the most positive and meaningful parts of your day. But perhaps most important, as Shawn put it, “the brain can’t tell much difference between visualization and actual experience, so you just doubled the most meaningful experience of your day. Done over time, your brain connects the dots and you realize you have a trajectory of meaning running throughout your life.” To create lasting, long-term effects, Shawn recommends giving these tactics a few weeks to train your brain to think happier and become habits.

4. Break tasks down

There is a reason video games seem so much more rewarding than work: video games provide you with a rapid succession of milestones, goals, and rewards, whereas most jobs are far more ambiguous and unstructured.

Creatingsubgoals for larger projects, spending more time planning out projects to add structure to them, and keeping a running list of things you have to get done for each of your projects will make your work more structured, rewarding, and engaging.Research has shown this also makes you more likely to achieve a “flow” state, that magicalfeeling where you’re so engrossed in your work that time seems to not exist at all.

5. Ask yourself foradvice

One of my favorite ways to become more productive when I’m facing a challenge is to ask myself for advice. I value the opinions of my friends and family, but I always ask myself for advice at the same time. The next time you’re facing a challenge and are looking around for someone to lean on, try leaning on yourself. What advice would you give yourself in your situation? (This tactic also works wonders for firing up your prefrontal cortex when you’re resisting aversive tasks.)

6.Reward yourself

I’ve talked about rewarding yourself throughout this book, but it’s so important that it’s worth mentioning again. Whether that means spending fifteen minutes on Facebook after each long workout, transferring a dollar into a frivolous spending account for every day you don’t bite your nails, or treating yourself to a fancy steak dinner when you finish a big work project, rewarding yourself works wonders not only for solidifying habits, but also for having fun as you invest in your productivity.

7. Know You Can Grow

According to research conducted byStanford psychologistCarol Dweck, the author ofMindset, the main thing that separates successful people from unsuccessful people is whether or not they feel their intelligence and abilities are fixed.

People who have agrowth mindset believe that through hard work and persistence, they can accomplish more. They embrace obstacles as challenges to be overcome, instead of seeing them as roadblocks, and they see working hard as the only way of mastering a skill. If you think your intelligence and abilities are set in stone, you are wrong. Reminding yourself that you can always grow and that your intelligence andabilities aren’t fixed is a great way to challenge yourself to become more productive.

8. Create anAccomplishments List

For the last few years, I’ve maintained an Accomplishments List that I’vereviewed and added to every Maintenance Day. It’s a simple list, so it doesn’t take long to review, but every week it lets me step back from my work and life, pat myself on the back, and recognize the achievements my increased productivity leads to.

Before keeping the list, I had invested in productivity without actually taking the time to reflect on what I accomplished. Reviewing the list at the end of each week propels me into the week ahead and motivates me to accomplish more—especially when I’m working on longer-term projects where the results aren’t immediately apparent.

9. Look at pictures of cute baby animals

Not only can looking at cute baby animals make you go “awwwwww,” it can also boost your cognitive and motor performance. One study analyzed the cognitive and motor performance of participants who looked at cute baby animals (as well as other cute images, which didn’t have the same effect).They found that cute baby animals had a positive effect on how participants managed their attention, and that “viewing cute things improves subsequent performance in tasks that require behavioral carefulness, possibly by narrowing the breadth of attentional focus.” This tactic may be a bit of a stretch, but there’s no denying that it’s fun.

BROKEN

I’ve always been a fan of takingvacations from my work for productivity reasons: to let my mind wander, take it easy on myself, let thoughts and ideas percolate, and to give myself space to make connections and think about the ideas I’m juggling.

Three months after I started this book, I was ahead of schedule, so Idecided to treat myself to a weeklong vacation to clear my head. I found a deal on a flight toDublin and jumped at it. For my weeklong trip, I elected to stay in Howth, a small fishing town of about eight thousand people that sits on the outskirts of Dublin. Most days I walked out of the Airbnb I was staying at without my cell phone or laptop in tow, only carrying around a notepad while I toured the Irish seaside. I let my mind wander and captured any interesting thoughts or connections that came up on paper. It was February and the nights were chilly, but even though it was “winter” in Ireland, it felt pretty damn warm during the day to me. (The average high in February in Dublin is a solid 5°C (41°F), thirty to forty degrees warmer thanOttawa that time of year.)

But less than two days into my trip, everything went to hell.

While walking home from a friend’s place shortly after midnight, I fell down a steep, slick cobblestone sidewalk. After the seemingly innocuous fall, I tried to get up—but realized that I couldn’t. When I transferred my weight from my right leg to my left, the pain—even after a pint or two of Guinness—was unbearable, and I crumbled back down to the ground. I pulled my cell phone out of my pocket, but it was dead. I tried shouting for help, but I was out in the Howth countryside and there weren’t any people around—or if there were, they weren’t awake. It was cold, and after the first hour of lying there, I started shivering so uncontrollably that I had to curl up into a ball to keep myself warm. A couple of times I tried to hop on one foot, but the pain was too great, and I fell back down again.

After about three hours, a couple of people finally heard me yelling for help. An ambulance rushed me to the hospital, just as the sun was beginning to rise. I was in a good deal of pain, and all I wanted to do was fly back home toCanada. But I couldn’t, because with a shattered ankle and leg bone, I wasn’t allowed to fly.

It’s amazing how much damage you can do when you fall the exact wrong way.

After a long reconstructive surgery that left me with a pin, plate, and footlong incision in my left leg, I lay in a hospital bed for three days, exhausted. To add insult to injury, I wasn’t even sure the surgery would be covered by the travel insurance I had purchased for the trip and hadto live with that uncertainty for a while as well. (It turned out it was covered—whew.)

Unable to get up out of the hospital bed without assistance—even a couple of days after my surgery—I remember lying helplessly while emails, phone messages, and more piled up on my smartphone. I didn’t have the energy or focus to deal with any of what was coming in and wouldn’t have enough energy forweeks. When I asked the surgeon how long it would take me to recover from the injury, his answer crushed me: because the fracture was severe, it would take aboutsix monthsto fully recover, and I would need six months of physiotherapy. As I write this, I still have to walk around town with a cane and can’t run or jump. (That said, the cane is pretty badass.)

Making the deadline for this book in time—let alone doing a good job of it—would have been hardwithoutmy injury, never mind while being in recovery for six months. I wasburned out, with no energy left to think or to handle anything else I had on my plate. I wished I could fast-forward six months until the cast was off and the book was in, and I was home again, surrounded by the people I loved—instead of being stranded and alone, five thousand kilometers away.

Every day, all day, each of us talks to ourselves—and this is perfectly normal. Everyone has an internal dialogue that runs through their head throughout the day; psychologists often call this an “internal monologue,” or “self-talk.” Of all the people you talk to regularly, there isn’t one person you talk to more than yourself.

If you’ve tried out the tactics I’ve written about inThe Productivity Project, chances are you’ve experienced this self-talk firsthand. Perhaps when you’ve become aware that you were procrastinating, as you observed your limbic system and prefrontal cortex battling, you also noticed your self-talk increase.Tim Pychyl told me recently that when you procrastinate, your “self-talk goes through the roof.” Maybe you noticed your brain having a heated dialogue with itself while you were meditating. Or perhaps you noticed this self-talk flare up when you were considering whether or not you should tackle some of the challenges at theend of the chapters in this book—especially the ones you were the most resistant to.

I experienced thisself-talk during my project, too, and if anything, it increased as the project went on. Curiously though, most of it was negative—and I don’t consider myself to be a negative person. After I made the decision to decline those jobs to startAYOP, my mind was full of excitement, nervousness, doubt, fear, and anxiety—and self-talk. Whenever I would put off reading an intimidating research paper, my negative self-talk went through the roof. When I stopped meditating toward the start of my project and began working faster and harder instead of deliberately and with intention, my self-talk went up right along with the pace I was working at. After I kept my first time log, my negative self-talk exploded as I came down on myself for procrastinating for six hours a week. When I failed to lower my body fat to 10 percent, I was again needlessly hard on myself. I expected myself to be able to lower my body fat seemingly overnight—when in reality I loved butter chicken too much. When I worked twenty-hour weeks, I was needlessly hard on myself again because I wasn’t working as long as I felt I should.

Even at the peaks of my project—such as after theNew York Timespublished an interview with me, or after getting the deal to write this book, I was needlessly hard on myself. I remember calling myself a “fraud” and feeling a pretty strong case of “imposter’s syndrome.”

About midway through the yearlong project, I stumbled upon an incredible fact that lifted a thousand pounds off my shoulders. Negative self-talk is absolutely, completelynormal.One psychologist,Shad Helmstetter, has found that “seventy-seven percentof everything we think is negative, counterproductive, and works against us.”Another study conducted on business students found that “somewherebetween 60 and 70 percentof the average students’ spontaneously occurring thoughts are negative.”

Self-talk is naturally hard to measure—after all, how do you analyze what’s going on in someone’s head? But I think these stats confirm an idea that’s profound. Having a negative dialogue in your head isn’t just average, it’shuman.

Have you experienced that phenomenon where you receive fiftyemails, forty-nine of them positive and one of them negative? I’ll bet you remember that one damned email more than the other forty-nine put together. This is simply the way we’re programmed. Just as we have evolved to walk five to nine miles every day, we have evolved to perceive threats in our environment. That’s why that email sticks out, and that’s in part why your monologue can be so negative.

Over the course of a few months, I collected all the negative thoughts that popped into my head, most of which seemed to come out of nowhere. Here are a few of the more interesting ones:

•I’m way out of my element.

•I’ll never get better at this.

•I’m no good.

•I know they’ll say no.

•I’m a fraud.

•I have nothing valuable to say.

•I’m not good enough.

•I know no one else feels this way.

•I can’t do this.

•I can’t do anything right.

•Why did I say that?!

•I’m pretty sure I’m the only one that doesn’t get this.

•They’re not going to like me.

•They’re going to laugh.

•I doubt anyone’s as lost as I am.

These are harsh words, and if I talked to my friends the way I talked to myself, I doubt I’d have any friends left. But as soon as I became aware that this is simply the result of how my brain was programmed, I felt as if another thousand pounds had been lifted off my shoulders.

Suddenly, I could start to step back and observe this dialogue, instead of becoming caught up in it. And I found I could challenge any thoughts that were B.S. which roughly 60–77 percent of them were.

As I slowly started to become coherent after my surgery, it hit me that I would likely miss the deadline for this book. Here I was, writing a book about productivity, “the most productive man you could ever hope to meet,” and I would miss my own book deadline. Ha!

In that moment I was back in the city bus riding home after my soylent experiment, ready once again to throw in the towel. I remember saying to myself a phrase I hadn’t recalled using up to that point:I give up.

But shortly after that thought came to me, I started laughing. Not maniacally or anything like that—after all, I didn’t transfer to the psych ward—just a small chuckle, as if my mind had wandered off during a meditation session. Because in a way, it had: instead of simply being in the present moment, my mind had wandered off to where it was programmed to go—to a place that was negative.

It was hard overcoming my negative self-talk, but a part of me knew that somehow, at the end of the day, I would be all right.

Ever since my project one of the very first things I’ve done after waking up has been to define the three things I wanted to accomplish over the course of the day. Old neurological pathways die hard, and after a day or two of lying in the hospital bed, as I slowly regained some energy and focus, I began to flip back into “productivity mode” and define three simple things I wanted to accomplish each day.

Productivity is often a process of understandingyourconstraints. The first day after the operation, I simply made an intention to do a couple of laps around the ward with my newfangled metal-framed walker. As I sat back down again, I felt exhilarated. I had achieved exactly what I intended to—taking into account the physical and mental limitations I faced. For the first few days I made one or two simple intentions—to read a book, type an important email or two, coordinate stuff with my assistant, or get in touch with friends and loved ones back home. And each day, as I reflected on how much time, attention, and energy I had,I adapted my intentions accordingly, and most days accomplished everything I set out to.

By that point, I had laid enoughproductivity groundwork that I was able to get right back up on my feet—even though I wasn’t allowed to bear any weight on the left one for at least a couple of months. I knew which tasks were the most important to me at the time, which gave me a guiding light when I found it hard to focus. I had ahabit of forming daily and weekly intentions to accomplish what was important. I had worked hard and was ahead of schedule, so I could be kind to my future self. I had simplified my work and delegated many of my lowest-return tasks to my assistant so I could focus on what was essential, instead of struggling to keep my head above water. I wasn’t storing my task list in my head, but rather on paper and on my devices, which helped when my mental capacity was reduced. And I had built up habits, like disconnecting from the internet, taming the distractions around me, single tasking, eating well, and getting enough sleep, that propelled me further and let me make good use of my limited energy.

I also took the time to meditate, even if just for a few minutes every day. This didn’t change any of what I was experiencing, but it completely changed how I related to what I was experiencing. It made me see the good in it, and it made me more resilient. In just a short day or two, particularly after my nightly gratefulness ritual, I became grateful that even though the people I loved were thousands of miles away, I could still talk to them every day, that I was covered for health insurance, and that I could probably even turn the injury into a interesting story someday.

You’re reading this book because of the productivity groundwork I had laid. In a weird way, this book is a product of the productivity research I was doing.

Three and a half months after breaking my ankle, I sent the manuscript of this book to my editor. I’m still not fully recovered—that will take another few months—but I finished the book, on time.

Actually, that’s not true. I shipped it six weeks ahead of schedule.

TEN DAYS INISOLATION

One of the questions I get the most often about my year of productivity is which productivity experiment I’ve learned the most from. Early on when I was asked, I’d usually be stumped by the question, but eventually the answer became very clear. The experiment I learned the most from was living in total isolation for ten days.

My intention behind most of my experiments was to take an element of my work or life that I figured either contributed to or detracted from my productivity and intensely focus on it for a period of time to think about and research how it influenced my performance. Meditating for thirty-five hours let me step back and observe the connection between meditation and productivity; using my smartphone for an hour let me think about technology and the internet; and eating onlysoylent let me think about food (even more than I regularly did).

When I set out to live in total isolation for ten days, my intention was to observe how people (and to a smaller extent, since I was living in a room without windows—sunlight) impacted my productivity. We can sometimes take people for granted, or settle into less than ideal relationships: we don’t often give ourselves space to step back from our relationships, or take the time to think about how much meaning they add to our lives.

But partway into my project, I hit a roadblock: when my girlfriend and I crunched the numbers and budgeted our finances through to the end of my project, they simply didn’t work. I wouldn’t have enough money to make it through my year of productivity. At the least I would have to take on a part-time job, or take out a loan to finish the year. (I had no ads or sponsorships on my site, because my intention with the site wasn’t to make money.)

Even though the idea for the productivity project has only publicly existed as a website,A Year of Productivitywas always more than just ablog to me. The yearlong project was a way of exploring every single one of my curiosities and connecting as many of them as I could—whetherthrough experiments, by diving into research, or by talking to experts—and then sharing everything I learned to help out other people.

So when we realized that the numbers didn’t add up, we came up with another option that is a bit embarrassing to write about. That option was for the two of us to move back home, into her dad’s house. After six years of living on our own, the thought of Ardyn and me moving in with her dad, even if only until the project was finished, felt like taking a thousand steps backward—especially for me, after declining two well-paying jobs to start the project. My negative self-talk was through the roof. But after letting the idea stew, a part of us felt that it was the right decision to make. (It’s worth noting that Ardyn didn’t have to move back home; she had more than enough cash in the bank, and she would be moving back to stay with me.)

The instant we moved in, I decided to double-down on my project. Why do anything if you’re not going to do it right? The sacrifices I was making would have to be worth it.

Just a few short weeks later, I decided to run my experiment to spend ten days in isolation, and to reflect on the relationships in my life.

When I stepped back from the relationships in my life—from my relationships with family, friends, my girlfriend, and even strangers on the street—it quickly became clear to me just how important people are toproductivity. Without people around me, my motivation to get work done plummeted.The research backs this up; two studies found that deeper office friendships boost your job satisfaction by about 50 percent, and that you areseven times as likelyto be highly engaged at work when your best friend works at the same place. When I asked Shawn what the most interesting thing he discovered in his research has been, he talked about how “the greatest predictor of long-term happiness is social connection,” and how “social connection is as predictive of how long you will live as obesity, high blood pressure, or smoking”—only in the opposite direction, of course. Deeper friendships and relationships provide us with the drive to accomplish more at work—and make us happier, to boot.

But more important, outside of work, relationships give us purposeand meaning. This is the lesson that struck me the hardest during the whole of my project, and it struck me from out of the blue: without people, productivity is meaningless.

As hellish as that basement was, I quickly realized how lucky I was to be down there, exploring my passion in my own weird way. Just a few days in, I became overwhelmed with gratitude for everyone who had helped me get there. Without my girlfriend and her dad, I wouldn’t have been able to continue with the project and would have had to accept a job working somewhere that had almost no meaning to me. Without the people who followed me, reading my site, the words I wrote wouldn’t have helped others. Without a loving family, I would have felt far less confident in my work. And without loving friends, I wouldn’t have had a support net to constantly fall into when I first started my project. It was the people around me—who supported me, helped me, believed in me, and loved me—that motivated me and gave me purpose. I quickly realized that the people around me weren’t just the reason my project existed—they were who my project existed for. People are what gave my work meaning, and in every job I had up to that point, people are what gave those jobs meaning, too.

People are why we do what we do, and why we push ourselves to accomplish more. Surrounding ourselves with people has been shown to make us happier and more engaged and makes us want to be more productive, too.

People are the reason for productivity.

PRODUCTIVITY ANDHAPPINESS

Happiness and productivity go hand in hand. But in a rather odd way, the desire to invest in your productivity implies, at least to some extent, that you’re not entirely satisfied with where you’re at right now. For me, this is one of those conflicts that forced me more than once to step back and consider the place that becoming more productive deserved to have in my life.

On the one hand, theBuddhist in me believes that happiness isnothing more than coming to terms with how things change. On the other hand, the driven part of me has always been uncomfortable with where I’m at, and for whatever reason has always wanted to accomplish more.

But I came to realize that it’s agoodthing to never feel fully satisfied—as long as I found ways to continually cultivate my happiness along the way.

The reasonhumans have survived and evolved for millions of years is that we, as a species, have never truly been content with where we are. We have always wanted to build bigger inventions, buildings, ideas, and movements. The fact that we have, for millions of years, constantly been motivated to advance ourselves as well as one another is a good thing and is the reason you’re reading these words today. Without theprinting press, there would be no way of spreading these ideas and eighty thousand words to people like you. Without the internet, I wouldn’t have been able to reach millions of people with my blog. Without language, I wouldn’t have a way of expressing the dots I have connected, or the strings I’ve pulled on over the last decade. Without your own desire to become better, you wouldn’t have picked up this book. While never truly being satisfied has had consequences (like supersized everything at fast-food restaurants), I think they’re worth the cost a hundred times over. This unsettledness is the reason we’ve evolved to be around today.

Over the course of my project, I found that the best attitude to have with productivity is an odd one: to never be satisfied—but to continually find ways to cultivate happiness. Luckily, productivity, when done right, isn’t only one of the keys to happiness—happiness is one of the keys to productivity.

The kinder you are to yourself as you become more productive, the more productive you will become.

AFTERWORD: ONE YEAR LATER

Estimated Reading Time:2 minutes, 14 seconds

Whenever I watch a cooking show where a celebrity chef likeGordon Ramsay visits a struggling restaurant to make over the place and its menu, I’m always a little disappointed when the show doesn’t revisit the same restaurant a year or two after the episode is shot.

In the shows that do, it’s usually hit or miss.*About half the time the restaurant thrives, and the other half of the time it either reverts to the way it operated before or goes under. Although the transformation always makes for goodtelevision, it often doesn’t last.

My yearlong experiment finished up on May 1, 2014, and I’m writing these words on May 20, 2015—more than a full year after it ended. If I was reading a book like this one, I would ask the same question that I do after a cheesy cooking show: Did the changes stick? Or did this productivity guy simply go back to the way he worked before?

The answer, put simply, is, the changes stuck. Every single one of them.

My favorite part of my yearlongproductivity project was how I actually got to experiment with everything I read about, to filter out what worked from what didn’t. To put it bluntly, about half of the quick tips and productivity hacks I encountered didn’t work—and as you might have guessed, those usually didn’t make it into the book. Pretty much everyone wants to get more done every day and have more time to do things that aremeaningful and impactful. Quick productivity hacks are sexy, but they’re the fad diets of the workplace. While you may lose a bit of water weight in the first few weeks, you won’t accomplish anything real over the long haul. That takes work.

While some of the tactics in this book are on the easier side, most of them take more time, attention, and energy than a simple productivity hack. But they work—and because I value my productivity so much, I’ve stuck with them.

They will work for you, too. But you have to step up. I’m not some self-help guru by any stretch of anyone’s imagination. But this much is inescapable: if you want to make the jump from the romantic idea of being more productive to actually accomplishing more on a daily basis, you have to put in the effort.

As I’ve done my best to make clear, productivity is made up of three things: time, attention, and energy. And I believe strongly that the greatestleaders in the knowledge economy will be the ones who combine all three better than anyone else. People like Marie Curie,Thomas Edison,Albert Einstein,Jane Goodall, andSteve Jobs all willed into existence some of the most brilliant ideas andinventions humanity has seen—and they had the exact same twenty-four hours every day that we do. The difference between them and everyone else—and between the corporate vice president and the employees who work for her—isn’t how much time they have every day. It’s that they know how to effectively manage their time, attention, and energy, and constantly make an effort to spend each more deliberately.

Just as this has been the case in the past, this will be the case in the future.

The future will be carved out by the people who combine all three ingredients of productivity to work more deliberately than everyone else.

*I watch theFood Networka lot.