8What If They Use Dirty Tricks?

(Taming the Hard Bargainer)

Principled negotiation is all very well, but what if the other negotiator deceives you or tries to throw you off balance? Or what if they escalate their demands just when you are on the verge of agreement?

There are many tactics and tricks people can use to try to take advantage of you. Everyone knows some of them. They range from lies and psychological abuse to various forms of pressure tactics. They may be illegal, unethical, or simply unpleasant. Their purpose is to help the user “win” some substantive gain in an unprincipled contest of will. Such tactics may be called tricky bargaining.

If they recognize that a tricky bargaining tactic is being used against them, most people respond in one of two ways. The first standard response is to put up with it. It is unpleasant to rock the boat. You may give the other side the benefit of the doubt or get angry and promise yourself never to deal with them again. For now, you hope for the best and keep quiet. Most people respond this way. They hope that if they give in this time, the other side will be appeased and will not ask for more. Sometimes this works, more often it fails. This is how Neville Chamberlain, the British Prime Minister, responded in 1938 to Hitler’s negotiating tactics. After Chamberlain thought he had an agreement, Hitler raised his demands. At Munich, Chamberlain, hoping to avoid war, went along. A year later, World War II started.

The second common response is to respond in kind. If they start outrageously high, you start outrageously low. If they are deceptive, so are you. If they make threats, you make counter-threats. If they lock themselves into their position, you lock yourself even more tightly into yours. In the end either one party yields or, all too often, negotiation breaks off.

Such tricky tactics are illegitimate because they fail the test of reciprocity. They are designed to be used by only one side; the other side is not supposed to know the tactics or is expected to tolerate them knowingly. Earlier we argued that an effective counter to a one-sided substantive proposal is to examine the legitimacy of the principle that the proposal reflects. Tricky bargaining tactics are in effect one-sided proposals about negotiatingprocedure,about the negotiating game that the parties are going to play. To counter them, you will want to engage in principled negotiation about the negotiating process.

How do you negotiate about the rules of the game?

There are three steps in negotiating the rules of the negotiating game where the other side seems to be using a tricky tactic: recognize the tactic, raise the issue explicitly, and question the tactic’s legitimacy and desirability—negotiate over it.

You have to know what is going on to be able to do something about it. Learn to spot particular ploys that indicate deception, those designed to make you uncomfortable, and those that lock the other side into their position. Often just recognizing a tactic will neutralize it. Realizing, for example, that the other side is attacking you personally to impair your judgment may well frustrate the effort.

After recognizing the tactic, consider bringing it up with the other side. “Say, Joe, I may be totally mistaken, but I’m getting the feeling that you and Ted here are playing a good-guy/bad-guy routine. If you two want a recess any time to straighten out differences between you, just ask.” Discussing the tactic not only makes it less effective, it also may cause the other side to worry about alienating you completely. Simply raising a question about a tactic may be enough to get them to stop using it.

The most important purpose of bringing the tactic up explicitly, however, is to give you an opportunity to negotiate about the rules of the game. This is the third step. This negotiation focuses on procedure instead of substance, but the goal remains to produce a wise agreement (this time about procedure) efficiently and amicably. Not surprisingly, the method remains the same.

Separate the people from the problem.Don’t attack people personally for using a tactic you consider illegitimate. If they get defensive it may be more difficult for them to give up the tactic, and they may be left with a residue of anger that will fester and interfere with other issues. Question the tactic, not their personal integrity. Rather than saying, “You deliberately put me here facing the sun,” attack the problem: “I am finding the sun in my eyes quite distracting. Unless we can solve the problem, I may have to leave early to get some rest. Shall we revise the schedule?” It will be easier to reform the negotiating process than to reform those with whom you are dealing. Don’t be diverted from the negotiation by the urge to teach them a lesson.

Focus on interests, not positions.“Why are you committing yourself in the press to an extreme position? Are you trying to protect yourself from criticism? Or are you protecting yourself from changing your position? Is it in our mutual interest to have both of us use this tactic?”

Invent options for mutual gain.Suggest alternative games to play. “How about our undertaking to make no statements to the press until we reach agreement or break off the talks?”

Insist on using objective criteria.Above all, be hard on principle. “Is there a theory behind having me sit in the low chair with my back to the open door?” Try out the principle of reciprocity on them. “I assume that you will sit in this chair tomorrow morning?” Frame the principle behind each tactic as a proposed “rule” for the game. “Shall we alternate spilling coffee on one another day by day?”

As a last resort, turn to your BATNA (your Best Alternative To a Negotiated Agreement) and walk out. “It’s my impression that you’re not interested in negotiating in a way that we both think will produce results. Here’s my phone number. If I’m mistaken, I’m ready any time you are. Until then, we’ll pursue the court option.” If you are walking out on clearly legitimate grounds, as when they have deliberately deceived you about facts or their authority, and if they are genuinely interested in an agreement, they are likely to call you back to the table.

Some common tricky tactics

Tricky tactics can be divided into three categories: deliberate deception, psychological warfare, and positional pressure tactics. You should be prepared to deal with all three. Below are a number of common examples of each type; for each in turn, we show how principled negotiation might be applied to counter it.

Deliberate deception

Perhaps the most common form of dirty trick is misrepresentation about facts, authority, or intentions.

Phony facts.The oldest form of negotiating trickery is to make some knowingly false statement: “This car was driven only 5,000 miles by a little old lady from Pasadena who never went over 35 miles per hour.” The dangers of being taken in by false statements are great. What can you do?

Disentangle the people from the problem. Unless you have good reason to trust somebody, don’t. This does not mean calling him a liar; rather it means making the negotiation proceed independent of trust. Do not let someone treat your doubts as a personal attack. No seller is likely to give you a watch or a car simply in exchange for your statement that you have money in the bank. Just as a seller will routinely check on your credit (“because there are so many other people around that can’t be trusted”), you can do the same for statements of the other side. A practice of verifying factual assertions reduces the incentive for deception, and your risk of being cheated.

Ambiguous authority.The other side may allow you to believe that they, like you, have full authority to compromise when they don’t. After they have pressed you as hard as they can and you have worked out what you believe to be a firm agreement, they announce that they must take it to someone else for approval. This technique is designed to give them a “second bite at the apple.”

This is a bad situation to fall into. If onlyyouhave authority to make concessions, only you will make concessions.

Do not assume that the other side has full authority just because they are there negotiating with you. An insurance adjuster, a lawyer, or a salesperson may allow you to think that your flexibility is being matched by flexibility on their side. You may later find that what you thought was an agreement will be treated by the other side as simply a floor for further negotiation.

Before starting on any give-and-take, find out about the authority on the other side. It is perfectly legitimate to inquire, “Just how much authority do you have in this particular negotiation?” If the answer is ambiguous, you may wish to talk to someone with real authority or to make clear that you on your side are reserving equal freedom to reconsider any point.

If they do announce unexpectedly that they are treating what you thought was an agreement as a basis for further negotiation, insist on reciprocity. “All right. We will treat it as a joint draft to which neither side is committed. You check with your boss and I’ll sleep on it and see if I come up with any changes I want to suggest tomorrow.” Or you might say, “If your boss approves this draft tomorrow, I’ll stick by it. Otherwise each of us should feel free to propose changes.”

One way to try to head off this problem is to clarify early in the negotiation that “nothing is agreed until everything is agreed,” so that any effort to reopen one issue automatically reopens all issues.

Dubious intentions.Where the issue is one of possible misrepresentation of their intention to comply with the agreement, it is often possible to build compliance features into the agreement itself.

Suppose you are a lawyer representing the wife in a divorce negotiation. Your client does not believe her husband will pay child support even though he may agree to do so. The time and energy spent in going to court every month may lead her to give up the effort. What can you do? Make the problem explicit and use their protestations to get a guarantee. You could say to the husband’s lawyer, “Look, my client is afraid those child support payments simply aren’t going to be made. Rather than monthly payments, how about giving her equity in the house?” The husband’s lawyer may say, “My client is perfectly trustworthy. We’ll put it in writing that he will pay child support regularly.” To which you might respond, “It’s not a matter of trust. Are you certain that your client will pay?”

“Of course.”

“A hundred percent certain?”

“Yes, I’m a hundred percent certain.”

“Then you won’t mind a contingent agreement. Your client will agree to make child support payments. We’ll provide that if, for some inexplicable reason that you estimate at zero percent probability, he misses two payments, my client will get the equity in the house (minus, of course, the amount your client has already paid out in child support) and your client will no longer be liable for child support.” It is not easy for the husband’s lawyer to object.

Less than full disclosure is not the same as deception.Deliberate deception as to facts or one’s intentions is quite different from not fully disclosing one’s present thinking. Good faith negotiation does not require total disclosure. Perhaps the best answer to questions such as “What is the most you would pay if you had to?” would be along the following lines: “Let’s not put ourselves under such a strong temptation to mislead. If you think no agreement is possible, and that we may be wasting our time, perhaps we could disclose our thinking to some trustworthy third party, who can then tell us whether there is a zone of potential agreement.” In this way it is possible to behave with full candor about information that is not being disclosed.

Psychological warfare

These tactics are designed to make you feel uncomfortable, so that you will have a subconscious desire to end the negotiation as soon as possible.

Stressful situations.Much has been written about the physical circumstances in which negotiations take place. You should be sensitive to such modest questions as whether a meeting takes place at your place or theirs, or on neutral territory. Contrary to the accepted wisdom, it is sometimes advantageous to accept an offer to meet on the other side’s turf. It may put them at ease, making them more open to your suggestions. If necessary, it will be easier for you to walk out. If, however, you do allow the other side to choose the physical environment, be aware of what that choice is and what effects it may have.

Ask yourself if you feel under stress, and if so, why. If the room is too noisy, if the temperature is too hot or cold, if there is no place for a private caucus with a colleague, be aware that the setting might have been deliberately designed to make you want to conclude negotiations promptly and, if necessary, to yield points to do so.

If you find the physical surroundings prejudicial, do not hesitate to say so. You can suggest changing chairs, taking a break, or adjourning to a different location or another time. In every case your job is to identify the problem, be willing to raise it with the other side, and then negotiate better physical circumstances in an objective and principled fashion.

Personal attacks.In addition to manipulating the physical environment, there are also ways for the other side to use verbal and nonverbal communication to make you feel uncomfortable. They can comment on your clothes or your appearance. “Looks like you were up all night. Things not going well at the office?” They can attack your status by making you wait for them or by interrupting the negotiations to deal with other people. They can imply that you are ignorant. They can refuse to listen to you and make you repeat yourself. They can deliberately refuse to make eye contact with you. (Simple experiments with students have confirmed the malaise many feel when this tactic is used, and they are unable to identify the cause of the problem.) In each case recognizing the tactic will help nullify its effect; bringing it up explicitly will probably prevent a recurrence.

The good-guy/bad-guy routine.One form of psychological pressure that also involves deception is the good-guy/bad-guy routine. This technique appears in its starkest form in old police movies. The first policeman threatens the suspect with prosecution for numerous crimes, puts him under a bright light, pushes him around, then finally takes a break and leaves. The good guy then turns off the light, offers the suspect a cigarette, and apologizes for the tough policeman. He says he’d like to control the tough guy, but he can’t unless the suspect cooperates. The result: the suspect tells all he knows.

Similarly in a negotiation, two people on the same side will stage a quarrel. One will take a tough stand: “This business is worth $80,000 and I won’t accept a penny less.” His partner looks pained and a little embarrassed. Finally he breaks in: “Frank, you are being unreasonable. After all, cash flow is a little down, even if receivables are strong.” Turning to the other side, he says reasonably, “Could you pay $76,000?” The concession isn’t large, but it almost seems like a favor.

The good-guy/bad-guy routine is a form of psychological manipulation. If you recognize it, you won’t be taken in. When the good guy makes his pitch, just ask him the same question you asked the bad guy: “I appreciate that you are trying to be reasonable, and I still want to know why you think that’s a fair price. What is your principle? I am prepared to pay $80,000 if you can persuade me it’s the fairest price.”

Threats.Threats are one of the most abused tactics in negotiation. A threat seems easy to make—much easier than an offer. All it takes is a few words, and if it works, you never have to carry it out. But threats can lead to counterthreats in an escalating spiral that can unhinge a negotiation and even destroy a relationship.

Threats are pressure. Pressure often accomplishes just the opposite of what it is intended to do; it builds up pressure the other way. Instead of making a decision easier for the other side, it often makes it more difficult. In response to outside pressure, a union, a committee, a company, or a government may close ranks. Moderates and hawks join together to resist what they may perceive as an illegitimate attempt to coerce them. The question changes from “Should we make this decision?” to “Shall we cave in to outside pressure?”

Good negotiators rarely resort to threats. They do not need to; there are other ways to communicate the same information. If it seems appropriate to outline the consequences of the other side’s action, suggest those that will occur independently of your will rather than those you could choose to bring about.Warningsare much more legitimate than threats and are not vulnerable to counterthreats: “Should we fail to reach agreement, it seems highly probable to me that the news media would insist on publishing the whole sordid story. In a matter of this much public interest, I don’t see how we could legitimately or realistically suppress information. Do you?”

You can also warn the other side about your likely actions in the event of no agreement, so long as you can show how those actions are intended to safeguard your interests,notto coerce or punish the other side. “So you are not surprised, here is a draft of the press release we plan to issue if our contract is not renewed.” If the other side finds this prospect unpleasant, they may react by asking, “Are you threatening me?” Provided your plans are a true warning, you should be able to reply confidently, “Absolutely not. In our shoes, would you recommend a better way to safeguard our interests?”

For threats to be effective they must be credibly communicated. Sometimes you can interfere with the communication process. You can ignore threats; you can take them as unauthorized, spoken in haste, or simply irrelevant. You can also make it risky to communicate them. At a coal mine where one of the authors was recently mediating, a large number of false but costly bomb threats were being received. These dropped off dramatically when the company’s receptionist began answering all phone calls with “Your voice is being recorded. What number are you calling?”

Sometimes threats can be turned to your political advantage. A union could announce to the press: “Management has such a weak case that they are resorting to threats.” Perhaps the best response to a threat, however, is to be principled. “We have prepared a sequence of countermoves for each of management’s customary threats. However, we have delayed taking action until we see whether we can agree that making threats is not the most constructive activity we could engage in just now.” Or “I only negotiate on the merits. My reputation is built on not responding to threats.”

Positional pressure tactics

This kind of bargaining tactic is designed to structure the situation so that only one side can effectively make concessions.

Refusal to negotiate.When the American diplomats and embassy personnel were taken hostage in Tehran in November 1979, the Iranian government announced its demands and refused to negotiate. A lawyer will often do the same, simply telling opposing counsel, “I’ll see you in court.” What can you do when the other side refuses to negotiate altogether?

First, recognize the tactic as a possible negotiating ploy: an attempt to use their entry into negotiation as a bargaining chip to obtain some concession on substance. A variant on this ploy is to set preconditions for negotiations.

Second, talk about their refusal to negotiate. Communicate either directly or through third parties. Don’t attack them for refusing to negotiate, but rather find out their interests in not negotiating. Are they worried about giving you status by talking to you? Will those who talk with you be criticized for being “soft”? Do they think negotiation will destroy their precarious internal unity? Or do they simply not believe that an agreement is possible?

Suggest some options, such as negotiating through third parties, sending letters, or encouraging private individuals like journalists to discuss the issues (as happened in the Iranian case).

Finally, insist on using principles. Is this the way they would want you to play? Do they want you to set preconditions as well? Will they want others to refuse to negotiate with them? What are the principles they think should apply to this situation?

Extreme demands.Negotiators will frequently start with extreme proposals like offering $175,000 for your house that is apparently worth $300,000. The goal is to lower your expectations. They also figure that an extreme initial position will give them a better end result, on the theory that the parties will ultimately end up splitting the difference between their positions. There are drawbacks to this approach, even for tricky bargainers. Making an extreme demand that both you and they know will be abandoned undermines their credibility. Such an opening may also kill the deal; if they offer too little, you may think they are not worth bothering with.

Bringing the tactic to their attention works well here. Ask for principled justification of their position until it looks ridiculous even to them.

Escalating demands.A negotiator may raise one of his demands for every concession he makes on another. He may also reopen issues you thought had been settled. The benefits of this tactic lie in decreasing the overall concession, and in the psychological effect of making you want to agree quickly before he raises any more of his demands.

The Prime Minister of Malta used this tactic in negotiating with Great Britain in 1971 over the price of naval and air base rights. Each time the British thought they had an agreement, he would say, “Yes, agreed, but there is still one small problem.” And the small problem would turn out to be a £10 million cash advance or guaranteed jobs for dockyard and base workers for the life of the contract.

When you recognize this, call it to their attention and then perhaps take a break while you consider whether and on what basis you want to continue negotiations. This avoids an impulsive reaction while indicating the seriousness of their conduct. And again, insist on principle. When you come back, anyone interested in settlement will be more serious.

Lock-in tactics.This tactic is illustrated by Thomas Schelling’s well-known example of two dynamite trucks barreling toward each other on a single-lane road. The question becomes which truck goes off the road to avoid an accident. As the trucks near each other, one driver in full view of the other pulls off his steering wheel and throws it out the window. Seeing this, the other driver has a choice between an explosive crash or driving his truck off the road into a ditch. This is an example of an extreme commitment tactic designed to make it impossible to yield. Paradoxically, you strengthen your bargaining position by weakening your control over the situation.

In labor-management and international negotiations this tactic is common. A union president makes a rousing speech to her constituency pledging that she will never accept less than a 15 percent salary increase. Since she stands to lose face and credibility if she does agree to anything less, she can more convincingly persuade management the union must have 15 percent.

But lock-in tactics are gambles. You may call the other side’s bluff and force them to make a concession, which they will then have to explain to their constituency.

Like threats, lock-in tactics depend on communication. If the other truck driver does not see the steering wheel fly out the window, or if he thinks the truck has an emergency steering mechanism, the act of throwing the steering wheel out the window will not have its intended effect. The pressure to avoid a collision will be felt equally by both drivers.

In response to a commitment tactic, therefore, you may be able to interrupt the communication. You can so interpret the commitment as to weaken it. “Oh, I see. You told the papers yourgoalwas to settle for $400,000. Well, we all have our aspirations, I guess. Do you want to know what mine are?” Alternatively, you can crack a joke and not take the lock-in seriously.

You can also resist lock-ins on principle: “Fine, Bob, I understand you made that statement publicly. But my practice is never to yield to pressure, only to reason. Now let’s talk about the merits of the problem.” Whatever you do, avoid making the commitment a central question. Deemphasize it so that the other side can more gracefully back down.

Hardhearted partner.Perhaps the most common negotiating tactic used to justify not yielding to your requests is for the other negotiator to say that he personally would have no objection, but his hardhearted partner will not let him. “It’s a perfectly reasonable request, I agree. But my boss absolutely refuses to hear of it.”

Recognize the tactic. Rather than discussing it with the other negotiator, you may want to get his agreement to the principle involved—perhaps in writing—and then if possible speak directly with the “hardhearted partner.”

A calculated delay.Frequently one side will try to postpone coming to a decision until a time they think favorable. Labor negotiators will often delay until the last few hours before a strike deadline, relying on the psychological pressure of the deadline to make management more malleable. Unfortunately, they often miscalculate and the strike deadline passes. Once the strike begins, management, in turn, may decide to wait for a more favorable time, such as when the union’s strike fund has run out. Waiting for the right time is a high-cost game.

In addition to making delaying tactics explicit and negotiating about them, consider creating a fading opportunity for the other side. If you represent one company negotiating a merger with another, start talks with a third company, exploring the possibility of merging with them instead. Look for objective conditions that can be used to establish credible deadlines, such as the date on which taxes are due, the annual trustees meeting, the end of the contract, or the end of the legislative session.

“Take it or leave it.”There is nothing inherently wrong with confronting the other side with a firm choice. In fact, most American business is conducted this way. If you go into a supermarket and see a can of beans marked $1.50, you don’t normally try to negotiate with the supermarket manager. This is an efficient method of conducting business, but it is not negotiation. It is not interactive decision-making. Nor is there anything wrong after long negotiations to conclude them when you mean to do so by saying, “Take it or leave it,” except that you should probably phrase it more politely.

As an alternative to explicitly recognizing the “Take it or leave it” tactic and negotiating about it, consider ignoring it at first. Keep talking as if you didn’t hear it, or change the subject, perhaps by introducing other solutions. If you do bring up the tactic specifically, let them know what they have to lose if no agreement is reached and look for a face-saving way, such as a change in circumstances, for them to get out of the situation. After management has announced its final offer, the union could tell them, “A $3.69 per hour raise was your final offer before we discussed our cooperative efforts to make the plant more productive.”

Don’t be a victim

It is often hard to decide what it means to negotiate in “good faith.” People draw the line in different places. It may help to ask yourself such questions as: Is this an approach I would use in dealing with a good friend or a member of my family? If a full account of what I said and did appeared in the media, would I be embarrassed? In literature, would such conduct be more appropriate for a hero or a villain? These questions are not intended to bring external opinion to bear so much as to shed light on your own internal values. You must decide on your own whether you want to use tactics you would consider improper and in bad faith if used against you.

It may be useful at the beginning of the negotiation to say, “Look, I know this may be unusual, but I want to know the rules of the game we’re going to play. Are we both trying to reach a wise agreement as quickly and with as little effort as possible? Or are we going to play ‘hard bargaining’ where the more stubborn fellow wins?” Whatever you do, be prepared to fight tricky bargaining tactics. You can be just as firm as they can, even firmer. It is easier to defend principle than an illegitimate tactic. Don’t be a victim.