PART II

SELF-AWARENESS

6

THE INNER RUDDER

Football, basketball, debate, you name it—the big rival to my high school in the Central Valley of California was in the next town down Highway 99. Over the years I’ve gotten friendly with a student from that other school.

During high school he wasn’t much interested in studies—in fact, he almost flunked out. Growing up on a ranch on the outskirts of town he spent a lot of time alone, reading science fiction and tinkering with hot rods, his passion. The week before he was to graduate, a car sped past from behind as he was making a left turn into his driveway, smashing his small sports car to bits. He almost died.

After recuperating, my friend went to the local community college, where he discovered a calling that riveted his attention and mobilized his creative talents: filmmaking. After transferring to a film school he made a movie for his student project that caught the eye of a Hollywood director, who hired him as an assistant. The director asked my friend to work on a pet project, a small-budget film.

That, in turn, led to my friend getting a studio to back him as director and producer of another small film based on his own script—a movie that the studio almost killed before its release, yet which did surprisingly better than anyone expected.

But the arbitrary cuts, edits, and other changes the studio bosses made before releasing that movie were a bitter lesson for my friend, who valued creative control of his work as paramount. When he went on to make a movie based on another script of his own, a big Hollywood studio offered him a standard deal whereby the studio financed the project and held the power to change the film before its release. He refused the deal—his artistic integrity was more important.

Instead my friend “bought” creative control by going off on his own and putting every penny of his profits from the first film into this second project. When he was almost done, his money ran out. He went looking for loans, but bank after bank turned him down. Only a last-minute loan from the tenth bank he implored saved the project.

The film wasStar Wars.

George Lucas’s insistence on keeping creative control despite the financial struggle that it entailed for him signifies enormous integrity—and, as the world knows, it also turned out to be a lucrative business decision. But this decision wasn’t motivated by the pursuit of money; back then ancillary rights meant selling movie posters and T-shirts, a trivial source of revenue. At the time, everyone who knew the film industry warned George against going out on his own.

Such a decision requires immense confidence in one’s own guiding values. What allows people to have such a strong inner compass, a North Star that steers them through life according to the dictates of their deepest values and purposes?

Self-awareness, particularly accuracy in decoding the internal cues of our body’s murmurs, holds the key. Our subtle physiological reactions reflect the sum total of our experience relevant to the decision at hand.

The decision rules derived from our life experiences reside in subcortical neural networks that gather, store, and apply algorithms from every event in our lives—creating our inner rudder.1The brain harbors our deepest sense of purpose and meaning in these subcortical regions—areas connected poorly to the verbal areas of the neocortex, but richly to the gut. We know our values by first getting a visceral sense of what feels right and what does not, then articulating those feelings for ourselves.

Self-awareness, then, represents an essential focus, one that attunes us to the subtle murmurs within that can help guide our way through life. And, as we shall see, this inner radar holds the key to managing what we do—and just as important, what wedon’tdo. This internal control mechanism makes all the difference between a life well lived and one that falters.

SHE’S HAPPY AND SHE KNOWS IT

The scientific test for self-awareness in animals is, in theory, simple: put a mark on their face, show them a mirror, and observe whether their actions indicate they realize that the face with the mark over there reflects their own.

Actually doing such a test for self-awareness in elephants is not so simple. For starters, you need to build an elephant-proof mirror. Try an eight-foot-by-eight-foot acrylic reflecting surface glued to plywood supported by steel framing, and bolted to the concrete wall of an elephant enclosure.

That’s what researchers did at the Bronx Zoo, where Happy, a thirty-four-year-old Asian elephant, lives with her two hulking friends, Maxine and Patty. The researchers let the elephants get used to the mirrors for a few days. Then they put a large white X on the head of one or another of the elephants to see if she would realize she had a mark there—an indication of self-recognition.

There’s a further complication when it comes to testing elephants. They “groom” themselves by taking mud baths and spraying dust all over themselves with their trunks. That adds a fair amount of debris to their skin, upping the odds that what we humans think of as a prominent mark might be trivial—just more of the usual detritus—to an elephant. And, indeed, Maxine and Patty paid no attention to their X.

But the day Happy got the big white X on her head she went over to the mirror and spent ten seconds looking at herself, then walked off—rather like humans when we glance in the mirror before going out to start our day. She then repeatedly felt around the X with the sensitive tip of her trunk, signifying self-awareness.

Only a highly select few in the animal kingdom have passed this test, including some varieties of apes and chimps, and dolphins (in an aquatic adaptation of the test). These species, like elephants, are among the handful of animals whose brains harbor a class of neurons some neuroscientists believe are uniquely essential for self-awareness. Named for their discoverer, Constantin von Economo (and called VENs for short), these spindle-shaped neurons can be double the size of most brain cells and have fewer branches—though much longer ones—connecting to other cells.2

Their size and spindle-like shape give VENs a unique advantage over other neurons: the signals they send travel faster and farther. And their main locations in areas that connect the executive brain to the emotional centers position them as personal radar. These areas light up when we see our reflection in the mirror. Neuroscientists see them as part of the brain’s circuitry for our sense of self at every level: of “this is me,” of “how I feel now,” and of our personal identity.

THE BRAIN’S MAP OF THE BODY

After being diagnosed with the liver cancer that was to take his life a few years later, Steve Jobs gave a heartfelt talk to a graduating class at Stanford University. His advice: “Don’t let the voice of others’ opinions drown out your inner voice. And most important, have the courage to follow your heart and intuition. They somehow already know what you truly want to become.”3

But how do you hear “your inner voice,” what your heart and intuition somehow already know? You need to depend on your body’s signals.

You may have seen the rather bizarre image of a body as mapped by the somatosensory cortex, which tracks the sensations registered by various areas of our skin: this critter has a tiny head but huge lips and tongue, teeny arms but giant fingers—all reflecting the relative sensitivity of nerves in various body parts.

Similar monitoring of our internal organs is done by the insula, tucked behind the frontal lobes of the brain. The insula maps our body’s insides via circuitry linking to our gut, heart, liver, lungs, genitals—every organ has its specific spot. This lets the insula act as a control center for organ functions, sending signals to the heart to slow its beat, the lungs to take a deeper breath.

Attention turned inward toward any part of the body amps up the insula’s sensitivity to the particular area we’re checking on. Tune in to your heartbeat and the insula activates more neurons in that circuitry. How well people can sense their heartbeat, in fact, has become a standard way to measure their self-awareness. The better people are at this, the bigger their insula.4

The insula attunes us to more than our organs; our very sense of how we are feeling depends on it.5People who are oblivious to their own emotions (and also—tellingly, as we’ll see—to how other people feel) have sluggish insula activity compared with the high activation found in people highly attuned to their inner emotional life. At the tuned-out extreme are those with alexithymia, who just don’t know what they feel, and can’t imagine what someone else might be feeling.6

Our “gut feelings” are messages from the insula and other bottom-up circuits that simplify life decisions for us by guiding our attention toward smarter options. The better we are at reading these messages, the better our intuition.

Take that tug you might sometimes feel when you suspect you’re forgetting something important just as you’re leaving on a big trip. A marathon runner tells me of a time she was on her way to a race four hundred miles away. She felt that tug—and ignored it. But as she continued on down the freeway, it kept coming back. Then she realized what was tugging at her: she had forgotten her shoes!

A stop at a mall that was just about to close saved the day. But her new shoes were a different brand from the ones she normally wore. As she told me, “I have never been more sore!”

Somatic markeris neuroscientist Antonio Damasio’s term for the sensations in our body that tell us when a choice feels wrong or right.7This bottom-up circuitry telegraphs its conclusions through our gut feelings, often long before the top-down circuits come to a more reasoned conclusion.

The ventromedial prefrontal area, a key part of this circuitry, guides our decision making when we face life’s most complex decisions, like who to marry or whether to buy a house. Such choices can’t be made by a cold, rational analysis. Instead we do better to simulate what it would feel like to choose A versus B. This brain area operates as that inner rudder.

There are two major streams of self-awareness: “me,” which builds narratives about our past and future; and “I,” which brings us into the immediate present. The “me,” as we’ve seen, links together what we experience across time. The “I,” in stark contrast, exists only in the raw experience of our immediate moment.

The “I,” our most intimate sense of our self, reflects the piecemeal sum of our sensory impressions—particularly our body states. “I” builds from our brain’s system for mapping the body via the insula.8

Such internal signals are our inner guides, helping us at many levels, from living a life in keeping with our guiding values to remembering our running shoes.

As a veteran performer at Cirque du Soleil told me, for their grueling routines Cirque performers strive for what she called “perfect practice,” where the laws of physical motion and rules of biomechanics come together with timing, angles, and speed, so you get “more perfect more of the time—you’re never perfect all of the time.”

And how do the performers know when they’re nearing perfection? “It’s the feeling. You know it in your joints before you know it in your head.”

7

SEEING OURSELVES AS OTHERS SEE US

We have a ‘No jerks allowed’ rule, but our chief tech officer is one,” an executive at a California tech incubator tells me. “He executes very well, but he’s a huge bully, freezes people out who he doesn’t like, plays favorites.

“He’s got zero self-awareness,” she adds. “He just does not realize when he’s being a bully. If you point out to him he’s just done it again, he shifts the blame, gets angry, or thinks you’re the problem.”

The company’s CEO later told me, “We worked with him for another three months or so, and then finally had to let him go. He couldn’t change—he was a bully, and didn’t even see it.”

All too often when we “lose it” and fall back on a less desirable way of acting, we’re oblivious to what we do. And if no one tells us, we stay that way.

One surefire test for self-awareness is a “360-degree” evaluation, where you’re asked to rate yourself on a range of specific behaviors or traits. Those self-ratings are checked against evaluations by a dozen or so people whom you have asked to rate you on the same scale. You pick them because they know you well and you respect their judgment—and their ratings are anonymous, so they can feel free to be frank. The gap between how you see yourself and how the others rate you offers one of the best evaluations you can get anywhere of your own self-awareness.

There’s an intriguing relationship between self-awareness and power: There are relatively few gaps between one’s own and others’ ratings among lower-level employees. But the higher someone’s position in an organization, the bigger the gap.1Self-awareness seems to diminish with promotions up the organization’s ladder.

One theory: That gap widens because as people rise in power within an organization the circle shrinks of others willing or courageous enough to speak to them honestly about their quirks. Then there are those who simply deny their deficits, or can’t see them in the first place.

Whatever the reason, tuned-out leaders see themselves as being far more effective than do those they are guiding. A lack of self-awareness leaves you clueless. ThinkThe Office.

A 360-degree evaluation applies the power of seeing ourselves through the eyes of others, which offers another pathway to self-awareness. Robert Burns, the Scottish poet, praised this pathway in verse:

Oh that the gods

The gift would gi’e us

To see ourselves

As others see us.

A more sardonic view was offered by W. H. Auden, who observed that, so “I may love myself,” we each create a positive self-image in our minds by selective forgetting of what’s unflattering to us and recalling what’s admirable about us. And, he added, we do something similar with the image we try to create “in the minds of others in order that they may love me.”

And philosopher George Santayana took this full circle, by noting that what other people think of us would matter little—except that once we know it, it “so deeply tinges what we think of ourselves.” Social philosophers have called this mirroring effect the “looking glass self,” how we imagine others see us.

Our sense of self, in this view, dawns in our social interactions; others are our mirrors, reflecting us back to ourselves. The idea has been summed up as “I am what I think you think I am.”

THROUGH OTHERS’ EYES—AND EARS

Life affords us little chance to see how others really see us. That may be why the course Bill George teaches at Harvard Business School, called Authentic Leadership Development, is among the most popular, overenrolled every time it is offered (the same goes with a similar course at Stanford’s business school).

As George told me, “We don’t know who we are until we hear ourselves speaking the story of our lives to someone we trust.” To expedite that heightening of self-awareness, George has created what he calls “True North Groups,” with “True North” referring to finding one’s inner compass and core values. His course gives students the chance to be in such a group.

A precept of the groups: self-knowledge begins with self-revelation.

These groups (which anyone can form) are as open and intimate as—or even more so than—twelve-step meetings or therapy groups, according to George, providing “a safe place where members can discuss personal issues they do not feel they can raise elsewhere—often not even with their closest family members.”2

It’s not just seeing ourselves as others see us. There’s also hearing ourselves as others hear us. We don’t.

The journalSurgeryreports a study where surgeons’ tone of voice was evaluated, based on ten-second snippets recorded during sessions with their patients.3Half the surgeons whose voices were rated had been sued for malpractice; half had not. The voices of those who had been sued were far more often rated as domineering and uncaring.

Surgeons spend more time than most other physicians explaining technical details to their patients, as well as disclosing the worst risks of surgery. It’s a difficult conversation, one that can put patients into a state of high anxiety and a heightened vigilance to emotional cues.

When it comes to the patient listening to the surgeon explain the technical details—and the frightening potential risks—the brain’s radar for danger goes into high alert, searching for cues and clues to how safe all this really might be. That heightened sensitivity may be one reason the empathy or concern—or rather, the lack of either—conveyed in a surgeon’s tone of voice tends to predict whether he will be sued if something goes wrong.

The acoustics of our skull case render our voice as it sounds to us very different from what others hear. But our tone of voice matters immensely to the impact of what we say: research has found that when people receive negative performance feedback in a warm, supportive tone of voice, they leave feeling positive—despite the negative feedback. But when they get positive performance reviews in a cold and distant tone of voice, they end up feeling bad despite the good news.4

One remedy proposed in theSurgeryarticle: give surgeons an audio replay of their voice as they talked to patients, so they can hear how they sound and get coaching on ways to make their voice communicate empathy and caring—to hear themselves as others hear them.

GROUPTHINK: SHARED BLIND SPOTS

In the wake of the economic meltdown of investment vehicles based on subprime derivatives, a financial type whose job had been creating those very derivative instruments was interviewed. He explained how in his job he would routinely take huge lots of subprime mortgages and divide them into three tranches: the best of the worst, the not-as-good, and the worst of the worst. Then he would take each of the tranches and again divide it into thirds—and create derivatives for investments based on each.

He was asked, “Who would want to buy these?”

His reply: “Idiots.”

Of course, seemingly very smart people did invest in those derivatives, ignoring signals that they were not worth the risk, and emphasizing whatever might support their decision. When this tendency to ignore evidence to the contrary spreads into a shared self-deception, it becomes groupthink. The unstated need to protect a treasured opinion (by discounting crucial disconfirming data) drives shared blind spots that lead to bad decisions.

President George W. Bush’s inner circle and their decision to invade Iraq based on imaginary “weapons of mass destruction” offers a classic example. So do the circles of financial players who fostered the mortgage derivatives meltdown. Both instances of catastrophic groupthink entailed insulated groups of decision-makers who failed to ask the right questions or ignored disconfirming data in a self-affirming downward spiral.

Cognition is distributed among members of a group or network: some people are specialists in one area, while others have complementary strengths of expertise. When information flows most freely among the group and into it, the best decisions will be made. But groupthink begins with the unstated assumptionWe know everything we need to.

A firm that manages investments for very wealthy people gave Daniel Kahneman a treasure trove: eight years of investment results for twenty-five of its financial advisers. Analyzing the data, Kahneman found that there were no relationships between any given adviser’s results from year to year—in other words, none of the advisers was consistently any better than the others at managing the clients’ money. The results were no better than chance.

Yet everyone behaved as though there were a special skill involved—and the top performers each year got big bonuses. His results in hand, Kahneman had dinner with the top brass at the firm and informed them that they were “rewarding luck as if it were skill.”

That should have been shocking news. But the executives calmly went on with their dinner and, Kahneman says, “I have no doubt that the implications were quickly swept under the rug and that life in the firm went on just as before.”5

The illusion of skill, deeply embedded in the culture of that industry, was under attack. But “facts that challenge such basic assumptions—and thereby threaten people’s livelihood and self-esteem—are simply not absorbed,” he adds.

Back in the 1960s, as the civil rights movement was boiling in the South, I joined a picket line at a local grocery store in my California hometown that did not then hire African-Americans. But it was not until years later, when I heard about the work of John Ogbu, a Nigerian anthropologist then at the University of California, Berkeley—who came to my nearby town to study what he called its “caste system”—that I realized therewasone, a kind of de facto segregation.6My high school was all-white, with a sprinkling of Asians and Hispanics; another high school was mostly black, with some Hispanics; the third was a mix. I had just never thought about it.

When it came to the grocery store, I could readily seetheirpart in discrimination—but I was blind to the larger pattern I was enmeshed within, the overall social ladder inherent in where people lived, and so where they went to school (in those days). Inequity in a society fades into the background, something we habituate to rather than orient toward. It takes effort to shift it back into our collective focus.

Such self-deception seems a universal twist of attention. For instance, when drivers rated their abilities behind the wheel, about three-quarters thought they were better than average. Strangely, those who had been in an auto accident weremorelikely to rate themselves as better drivers than did those whose driving record was accident-free.

Even stranger: In general, most people rate themselves as being less likely than others to overrate their abilities. These inflated self-ratings reflect the “better-than-average” effect, which has been found for just about any positive trait, from competence and creativity to friendliness and honesty.

I read Kahneman’s account in his fascinating bookThinking Fast and Slowwhile on a Boston-to-London flight. As the plane landed I chatted with the fellow across the aisle, who had been eyeing the cover. He told me he planned to read the book—and happened to mention that he invested the assets of wealthy individuals.

As our plane taxied down the long runway and found its way to our gate at Heathrow, I summarized the main points for him, including this tale about the financial firm—adding that it seemed to imply his industry rewarded luck as though it were skill.

“I guess,” he replied with a shrug, “I don’t have to read the book now.”

When Kahneman had reported his results to the money managers themselves, they responded with a similar indifference. As he says of such disconcerting data, “The mind does not digest them.”

It takes meta-cognition—in this case, awareness of our lack of awareness—to bring to light what the group has buried in a grave of indifference or suppression. Clarity begins with realizing what we do not notice—and don’t notice that we don’t notice.

Smart risks are based on wide and voracious data-gathering checked against a gut sense; dumb decisions are built from too narrow a base of inputs. Candid feedback from those you trust and respect creates a source of self-awareness, one that can help guard against skewed information inputs or questionable assumptions. Another antidote to groupthink: expand your circle of connection beyond your comfort zone and inoculate against in-group isolation by building an ample circle of no-BS confidants who keep you honest.

A smart diversification goes beyond gender and ethnic group balance to include a wide range of ages, clients, or customers, and any others who might offer a fresh perspective.

“Early on in our operation, our servers failed,” an executive at a cloud computing company says. “Our competitors were monitoring us, and soon we got a flood of calls from reporters asking what was going on. We didn’t answer the calls, because we didn’t know what to say.

“Then one employee, a former journalist, came up with a creative solution: a website called ‘Trust Cloud’ where we were completely open about what was happening with our server—what the problem was, how we were trying to fix it, everything.”

That was a foreign idea to most executives there; they had come from tech companies where heightened secrecy was routine. The unquestioned assumption that they should keep the problem to themselves was a potential seed of groupthink.

“But once we became transparent,” the executive says, “the problem went away. Our customers were reassured they could know what was happening, and reporters stopped calling.”

“Sunlight,” as Supreme Court justice Felix Frankfurter once said, “is the best disinfectant.”

8

A RECIPE FOR SELF-CONTROL

When my sons were just two or so and would get upset, I sometimes used distraction to calm them down:Look at that birdie, or an all-service, enthusiasticWhat’s that?with my gaze or finger directing their focus toward something or other.

Attention regulates emotion. This little ploy uses selective attention to quiet the agitated amygdala. So long as a toddler stays tuned to some interesting object of focus, the distress calms; the moment that thing loses its fascination, the distress, if still held on to by networks in the amygdala, comes roaring back.1The trick, of course, lies in keeping the baby intrigued long enough for the amygdala to calm.

As infants learn to use this attention maneuver for themselves, they acquire one of their first emotional self-regulation skills—one that has vast importance for their destiny in life: how to manage the unruly amygdala. Such a ploy takes executive attention, a capacity that starts to flower in the third year of life when a toddler can show “effortful control”—focusing at will, ignoring distractions, and inhibiting impulse.

Parents might notice this landmark when a toddler makes the intentional choice to say “no” to a temptation, like waiting for dessert until after she’s taken some more bites of what’s on her plate. That, too, depends on executive attention, which blossoms into willpower and self-discipline—as in managing our disturbing feelings and ignoring whims so we can stay focused on a goal.

By age eight most children master greater degrees of executive attention. This mental tool manages the operation of other brain networks for cognitive skills like learning to read and do math, and academics in general (we’ll look into this more in part 5).

Our mind deploys self-awareness to keep everything we do on track: meta-cognition—thinking about thinking—lets us know how our mental operations are going and adjust them as needed; meta-emotion does the same with regulating the flow of feeling and impulse. In the mind’s design, self-awareness is built into regulating our own emotions, as well as sensing what others feel. Neuroscientists see self-control through the lens of the brain zones underlying executive function, which manages mental skills like self-awareness and self-regulation, critical for navigating our lives.2

Executive attention holds the key to self-management. This power to direct our focus onto one thing and ignore others lets us bring to mind our waistline when we spot those quarts of Cheesecake Brownie ice cream in the freezer. This small choice point harbors the core of willpower, the essence of self-regulation.

The brain is the last organ of the body to mature anatomically, continuing to grow and shape itself into our twenties—and the networks for attention are like an organ that develops in parallel with the brain.

As every parent of more than one child knows, from day one each baby differs: one is more alert, or calmer, or more active than another. Such differences in temperament reflect the maturation and genetics of various brain networks.3

How much of our talent for attention comes from our genes? It depends. Different attention systems, it turns out, have different degrees of heritability.4The strongest heritability is for executive control.

Even so, building this vital skill depends to a large extent on what we learn in life. Epigenetics, the science of how our environment affects our genes, tells us that inheriting a set of genes is not in itself enough for them to matter. Genes have what amounts to a biochemical on/off switch; if they are never turned on we may as well not have them. The “on” switch comes in many forms, including what we eat, the dance of chemical reactions within the body, and what we learn.

WILLPOWER IS DESTINY

Decades of research results show the singular importance of willpower in determining the course of life. One of the first of these was a small project in the 1960s in which kids from deprived homes were given special attention in a preschool program that helped them cultivate self-control, among other life skills.5That project had hoped to boost their IQ, but it failed at that. Still, years later, when those preschoolers were compared with similar kids who had not participated in the program, over the course of life they had lower rates of teen pregnancies, school dropouts, delinquency, and even days missed from work.6The findings were a major argument for what has become the Head Start preschool programs, now found everywhere in the United States.

And then there was the “marshmallow test,” a legendary study done by psychologist Walter Mischel at Stanford University in the 1970s. Mischel invited four-year-olds one by one into a “game room” at the Bing Nursery School on the Stanford campus. In the room the child was shown a tray with marshmallows or other treats and told to pick one she would like.

Then came the hard part. The experimenter told the child, “You can have your treat now, if you want. But if you don’t eat it until I come back from running an errand, you can have two then.”

The room was sanitized of distractions: no toys, no books, not even a picture. Self-control was a major feat for a four-year-old under such dire conditions. About a third grabbed the marshmallow on the spot, while another third or so waited the endless fifteen minutes until they were rewarded with two (the other third fell somewhere in the middle). Most significant: the ones who resisted the lure of the sweet had higher scores on measures of executive control, particularly the reallocation of attention.

How we focus holds the key to willpower, says Mischel. His hundreds of hours of observation of little kids fighting off temptation reveal “the strategic allocation of attention,” as he puts it, to be the crucial skill. The kids who waited out the full fifteen minutes did it by distracting themselves with tactics like pretend play, singing songs, or covering their eyes. If a kid just stared at the marshmallow, he was a goner (or more precisely, the marshmallow was).

At least three sub-varieties of attention, all aspects of the executive, are at play when we pit self-restraint against instant gratification. The first is the ability to voluntarily disengage our focus from an object of desire that powerfully grabs our attention. The second, resisting distraction, lets us keep our focus elsewhere—say, on fantasy play—rather than gravitating back to that juicy whatever. And the third allows us to keep our focus on a goal in the future, like the two marshmallows later. All that adds up to willpower.

Well and good for children who show self-control in a contrived situation like the marshmallow test. But what about resisting the temptations of real life? Enter the children of Dunedin, New Zealand.

Dunedin has a populace of just over one hundred thousand souls and houses one of that country’s largest universities. This combination made the town ripe for what may be the most significant study yet in the annals of science on the ingredients of life success.

In a dauntingly ambitious project, 1,037 children—all the babies born over a period of twelve months—were studied intensively in childhood and then tracked down decades later by a team assembled from several countries. The team represented many disciplines, each with its own perspective on that key marker for self-awareness, self-control.7

These kids underwent an impressive battery of tests over their school years, such as assessing their tolerance for frustration and their restlessness, on the one hand, and powers of concentration and persistence on the other.8

After a two-decade lull all but 4 percent of the kids were tracked down (a feat far easier in a stable country like New Zealand than, say, in the hypermobile United States). By then young adults, they were assessed for:

•   Health. Physicals and lab tests looked at their cardiovascular, metabolic, psychiatric, respiratory, even dental and inflammatory conditions.

•   Wealth. Whether they had savings, were single and raising a child, owned a home, had credit problems, had investments, or had retirement funds.

•   Crime. All court records in Australia and New Zealand were searched to see if they had been convicted of a crime.

The better their self-control in childhood, the better the Dunedin kids were doing in their thirties. They had sounder health, were more successful financially, and were law-abiding citizens. The worse their childhood impulse management, the less they made, the shakier their health, and the more likely it was that they had a criminal record.

The big shock: statistical analysis found that a child’s level of self-control is every bit as powerful a predictor of her adult financial success and health (and criminal record, for that matter) as are social class, wealth of family of origin, or IQ. Willpower emerged as a completely independent force in life success—in fact, for financial success, self-control in childhood proved astrongerpredictor than either IQ or social class of the family of origin.

The same goes for school success. In an experiment where American eighth graders were offered a dollar now or two dollars in a week, this simple gauge of self-control turned out to correlate with their grade point average better than did their IQ. High self-control predicts not just better grades, but also a good emotional adjustment, better interpersonal skills, a sense of security, and adaptability.9

Bottom line: kids can have the most economically privileged childhood, yet if they don’t master how to delay gratification in pursuit of their goals those early advantages may wash out in the course of life. In the United States, for example, only two in five children of parents in the top 20 percent of wealth end up in that privileged status; about 6 percent drift down to the bottom 20 percent in income.10Conscientiousness seems as powerful a boost in the long run as fancy schools, SAT tutors, and pricey educational summer camps. Don’t underestimate the value of practicing the guitar or keeping that promise to feed the guinea pig and clean its cage.

Another bottom line: Anything we can do to increase children’s capacity for cognitive control will help them throughout life. Even Cookie Monster can learn to do better.

COOKIE MONSTER LEARNS TO NIBBLE

The day I dropped by Sesame Workshop, headquarters for the TV neighborhood of Bert and Ernie, Big Bird, Cookie Monster, and the rest of the gang beloved in the 120-plus nations where Sesame Street airs, there was a meeting of the core staff with cognitive and brain scientists.

Sesame Street’s DNA wraps entertainment around the science of learning. “At the core of every clip onSesame Streetis a curriculum goal,” said Michael Levine, executive director of the Joan Ganz Cooney Center at the show’s workshop. “Everything we show is pretested for its educational value.”

A network of academic experts reviews show content, while the real experts—preschoolers themselves—ensure that the target audience will understand the message. And shows with a particular focus, like a math concept, are tested again for their educational impact on what the preschoolers actually learned.

That day’s meeting with scientists had cognitive essentials as a theme. “We need top researchers sitting with top writers in developing the shows,” said Levine. “But we need to get it right: listen to the scientists, but then play with it—have some fun.”

Take a lesson in impulse control, the secret sauce in a segment about the Cookie Connoisseur Club. Alan, the owner of Hooper’s Store on Sesame Street, baked cookies to be sampled by the club—but no one had planned for Cookie Monster to join. When Cookie arrives by surprise on the scene he, of course, wants to eat all the cookies.

Alan explains to Cookie that if you want to be a member of the club, you need to control your impulse to gobble up all the cookies. Instead, you learn to savor the experience. First you pick up the cookie and look for imperfections, then smell it, and finally nibble a bit. But Cookie, impulse embodied, can only gobble the cookie down.

To get the self-regulation strategies right in this segment, says Rosemarie Truglio, senior vice president for education and research, they consulted with none other than Walter Mischel, the mastermind behind the marshmallow test.

Mischel proposed teaching Cookie cognitive control strategies like “Think of the cookie as something else” and reminding himself of that something. So Cookie sees the cookie is round and looks like a yo-yo, and dutifully repeats to himself over and over that the cookie is a yo-yo. But then he gobbles anyway.

To help Cookie take just a nibble—a major triumph of willpower—Mischel suggested a different impulse-delay strategy. Alan tells Cookie, “I know this is hard for you, but what’s more important: this cookie now, or getting into the club where you’ll get all kinds of cookies?” That did the trick.

A mind too easily distracted by the least hint of a cookie will not have the staying power to understand fractions, let alone calculus. Parts of theSesame Streetcurriculum highlight such elements of executive control, which creates a mental platform prerequisite for tackling the “STEM” topics: science, technology, engineering, and math.

“Teachers in early grades tell us, I need kids to come to me ready to sit down, focus, manage their emotions, listen to directions, collaborate, and make friends,” Truglio explained. “Then I can teach them letters and numbers.”

“Cultivating a sense for math and early literacy skills,” Levine told me, requires self-control, based on changes in executive function during the preschool years. The inhibitory controls related to executive functioning correlate closely with both early math and reading ability. “Teaching these self-regulation skills,” he added, “may actually rewire parts of the brain for kids in whom they have been underdeveloped.”

THE POWER TO CHOOSE

Like this piece of art? People around the world say depictions of scenes like this are among their very favorite: an idyllic view from a high vantage point, looking toward water, a meadow, maybe some animals. Perhaps this universal preference dates back to the long epoch in human prehistory when our species roamed the savannas, or huddled in caves tucked into a hillside for protection and warmth.

If from here you manage to stay with what I’ve written and not look back at that peaceful scene, though you may feel a mental pull to peek, you create in your own brain a tussle between focus and distraction. That tension occurs anytime we try to stay concentrated on one thing and ignore the lure of another. It means there’s a neural conflict going on, an arousal level tug-of-war in top-down versus bottom-up circuitry.

And by the way, remember, don’t look over there at that art—stay right here with what I’m telling you about what’s going on in your brain. This inner conflict duplicates the battle a kid fights when her mind wants to wander away from her math homework, to check for texts from her BFF.11

Test high school students for their natural talent in math and you’ll find a spread: some kids are pretty terrible, many are merely not so good, and 10 percent or so show great potential. Take that top 10 percent and track them as they go through a tough math class for a year; most will get top grades. But contrary to predictions, a portion of these high-potential students will fare poorly.

Now give each of the math students a device that buzzes at random times through the day and asks them to rate their mood at that moment. If they happen to be working on math, those who did well will report being in a positive mood far more often than being in an anxious one. But those who do poorly will report the reverse: about five times more anxious episodes than pleasant episodes.12

That ratio holds a secret of why those with great potential for learning can sometimes end up floundering. Attention, cognitive science tells us, has a limited capacity: working memory creates a bottleneck that lets us hold just so much in mind at any given moment (as we saw in chapter 1). As our worries intrude on the limited capacity of our attention, these irrelevant thoughts shrink the bandwidth left for, say, math.

The ability to notice that we are getting anxious and to take steps to renew our focus rests on self-awareness. Such meta-cognition lets us keep our mind in the state best suited for the task at hand, whether algebraic equations, following a recipe, or haute couture. Whatever our best talents may be, self-awareness will help us display them at their peak.

Of the many nuances and varieties of attention, two matter greatly for self-awareness. Selective attention lets us focus on one target and ignore everything else. Open attention lets us take in information widely in the world around us and the world within us, and pick up subtle cues we’d otherwise miss.

Extremes in either of these kinds of attention—being too focused outwardly or too open to what’s going on around us—can, as Richard Davidson puts it, “make it impossible to be self-aware.”13Executive function includes attention to attention itself, or more generally, awareness of our mental states; this lets us monitor our focus and keep it on track.

Executive function (as cognitive control is sometimes called) can be taught (as we’ve just seen, and will explore in more detail in part 5). Teaching executive skills to preschoolers makes them more ready for their school years than does a high IQ or having already learned to read.14As theSesame Streetteam knows, teachers want students with good executive function, as signified by self-discipline, attention control, and the ability to resist temptations. Such executive functions predict good math and reading scores throughout school, apart from—and more than—a child’s IQ.15

Of course it’s not just for kids. This power to direct our focus onto one thing and ignore others lies at the core of willpower.

A BAG OF BONES

In fifth-century India, monks were encouraged to contemplate the “thirty-two body parts,” a list of unappealing corners of human biology: dung, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, fat, snot, and so on. This focus on distasteful aspects was meant to build detachment from one’s own body, as well as to help celibate monks disavow lust—in other words, to boost willpower.

Fast-forward sixteen hundred years and contrast that ascetic effort with its extreme opposite. As I was told by a social worker who rescues teen sex workers in Los Angeles: “It’s unbelievable how impulsive some kids can be. They live on the streets, but if they got a thousand dollars, they’d spend it all on the most expensive iPhone, instead of getting a roof over their heads to find the security they need.”

His program helps HIV-infected youngsters get government funds; takes them off the streets; and gives them free medical care, a stipend for an apartment and food, even a gym membership. “I actually saw friends of some of these kids,” he tells me, “go out to become HIV-positive so they could get the benefits.”

That same contrast between high cognitive control and its utter lack was discovered in a more innocent vein years ago in that Stanford test of gratification delay in four-year-olds tempted by a marshmallow. When fifty-seven of those Stanford preschoolers were tracked down forty years later, “high delayers” who resisted the marshmallow at age four were still able to delay gratification, but the “low delayers” were still poor at stifling impulse.

Then their brains were scanned while they resisted temptation. High delayers activated circuits in their prefrontal cortex key to controlling thoughts and actions—including the right inferior frontal gyrus, which says no to impulse. But low delayers activated their ventral striatum, a circuit in the brain’s reward system that springs to life when we yield to life’s temptations and guilty pleasures, like a drug or a luscious dessert.16

In the Dunedin study, the teen years mattered especially for cognitive control. As adolescents those lower in self-control were the ones most likely to take up smoking, to become an unplanned teen parent, or to drop out of school—all snares that close doors to later opportunities and trap them in lifestyles that accelerate that path to lower-income jobs, poorer health, and, in some cases, criminal careers.

So does this mean that kids with hyperactivity or attention deficit disorder are doomed to problems? Not at all—as for kids overall, there was a gradient of bad-to-good outcomes among those with ADHD. Even for this group relatively greater self-control predicted a better life outcome, despite their attention problems while in school.

It’s not just four-year-olds and teens. The chronic cognitive overload that typifies life for so many of us seems to lower our threshold for self-control. The greater the demands on our attention, it seems, the poorer we get at resisting temptations. The epidemic of obesity in developed countries, research suggests, may be due in part to our greater susceptibility, while distracted, to go on automatic and reach for sugary, fatty foods. Those who have been most successful at losing pounds and keeping them off, brain imaging studies find, exhibit the most cognitive control when facing a calorie-laden morsel.17

Freud’s famous dictum “Where id was, there ego shall be” speaks directly to this inner tension. Id—the bundle of impulses that make us reach for the Dove Bar, buy that really-too-expensive luxury item, or click on that luscious but totally time-wasting website—constantly struggles with our ego, the mind’s executive. Ego lets us lose weight, save money, and allot time effectively.

In the mind’s arena, willpower (a facet of “ego”) represents a wrestling match between top and bottom systems. Willpower keeps us focused on our goals despite the tug of our impulses, passions, habits, and cravings. This cognitive control represents a “cool” mental system that makes an effort to pursue our goals in the face of our “hot” emotional reactions—quick, impulsive, and automatic.

The two systems signify a critical difference in focus. The reward circuits fixate on hot cognition, thoughts with a high emotional charge, like what’s tempting about the marshmallow (it’s yummy, sweet, and chewy). The greater the charge, the stronger the impulse—and the more likely it is that our more sober-minded prefrontal lobes will be hijacked by our desires.

That prefrontal executive system, in contrast, “cools the hot,” by suppressing the impulse to grab, and reappraising the temptation itself (it’s also fattening). You (or your four-year-old) can activate this system by thinking about, for example, the shape of the marshmallow, or its color, or how it’s made. This switch in focus lowers the energy charge to grab for it.

Just as he suggested for Cookie Monster, in his experiments at Stanford Mischel helped some of the kids out with a simple mental trick: he taught them to imagine that the candy is just a picture with a frame around it. Suddenly that irresistible hunk of sugar that loomed so large in their mind became something they could pretend was not real, something they could focus on or not. Changing their relationship to the marshmallow was a bit of mental judo that let kids who hadn’t been able to delay their grab for the sweet more than one minute deftly resist temptation for fifteen.

Such cognitive control of impulse bodes well in life. As Mischel puts it, “If you can deal with hot emotions, then you can study for the SAT instead of watching television. And you can save more money for retirement. It’s not just about the marshmallow.”18

Intentional distractions, cognitive reappraisal, and other meta-cognitive strategies entered psychology’s playbook in the 1970s. But similar mental maneuvers were deployed long ago by those fifth-century monks as they contemplated the body’s “loathsome” parts.

A tale from those days has it that one of these monks is walking along when a gorgeous woman comes running by.19That morning she had a heated quarrel with her husband and she’s now fleeing to her parents’ house.

A few minutes later, her husband, in pursuit, shows up and asks the monk, “Venerable sir, did you by any chance see a woman go by?”

And the monk answers, “Man or woman, I cannot say. But a bag of bones passed this way.”