PART V

SMART PRACTICE

15

THE MYTH OF 10,000 HOURS

The Iditarod may be the world’s most grueling race: sled dogs compete over a gauntlet of more than eleven hundred miles of Arctic ice, running for more than a week. Typically the dogs and musher go all day and rest at night, or go all night with rest during the day.

Susan Butcher reinvented the Iditarod by running and resting alternately in four-to-six-hour chunks throughout the night and day instead of twelve hours on and twelve off. It was a risky innovation—for one, it gave her less chance to sleep (while her dogs slept she would have to prepare for the next leg). But she and her sled dogs had practiced that way, and from the first time she tried, Butcher just knew in her heart the all-out regimen could work.

Butcher went on to win the Iditarod four times. She died from leukemia (which had claimed her brother in her childhood) a decade after her racing days. In her honor, the state of Alaska proclaimed the first day of the Iditarod to be Susan Butcher Day.

Butcher, a veterinary technician, was a leader in humane treatment of her dogs, making year-round care and training the standard for mush teams rather than an exception. She was attuned to the biological limits of what her dogs could withstand. Poor treatment of dogs has been the main criticism of the race.

Butcher trained her dogs much as a marathoner prepares for a race, realizing that rest is as important as running. “For Susan, dog care was the number-one priority,” her husband, David Monson, told me. “She regarded her dogs as year-round professional athletes, giving them the highest-quality veterinary care, training, and nutrition.”

Then there was her personal preparation. “Most people can’t imagine the complexity of going on a thousand-mile expedition in the ice and snow that might last for up to fourteen days,” Monson told me. “The temperature varies from forty above to sixty below; you’re at the mercy of blizzards. You’ve got to bring repair kits, and food and medicine for yourself and your dogs, and make the right strategic decisions. It’s like preparing for an expedition up Everest.

“For instance, there are ninety or a hundred miles between checkpoints where you’ve cached food and supplies for the next segment, and you need a pound of dog food for each dog every day. But if the next area might have a blizzard, you need to take extra food and shelter for the dogs. And that adds weight.”

Butcher had to make such life-and-death decisions—plus stay vigilant and attentive—while getting just one or two hours of sleep a day. While the dogs rested as much as they ran, during their breaks she would be busy caring for and feeding the dogs and herself, and making any needed repairs. “Keeping your attention up during a highly exhausting and stressful time means you have to be methodical and well practiced, so you make the right decisions under duress,” Monson says.

She spent hours and hours fine-tuning her mushing skills, studying the subtleties of snow and ice, and bonding with her dogs. But it was her self-discipline that was most prominent in her training regimen.

“She was really able to focus,” said Joe Runyan, another Iditarod winner. “And that’s what made her really good at the sport.”

The “10,000-hour rule”—that this level of practice holds the secret to great success in any field—has become sacrosanct gospel, echoed on websites and recited as litany in high-performance workshops.1The problem: it’s only half true.

If you are a duffer at golf, say, and make the same mistakes every time you try a certain swing or putt, 10,000 hours of practicing that error will not improve your game. You’ll still be a duffer, albeit an older one.

No less an expert than Anders Ericsson, the Florida State University psychologist whose research on expertise spawned the 10,000-hour rule of thumb, told me, “You don’t get benefits from mechanical repetition, but by adjusting your execution over and over to get closer to your goal.”2

“You have to tweak the system by pushing,” he adds, “allowing for more errors at first as you increase your limits.”

Apart from sports like basketball or football that favor physical traits such as height and body size, says Ericsson, almostanyonecan achieve the highest levels of performance with smart practice.

Iditarod mushers at first dismissed Susan Butcher’s chances of ever winning the race. “In those days,” David Monson recalls, “the Iditarod was considered a man’s cowboy-type sport—rough-and-tumble. You did it because you were tough. Other racers said Susan could never win—she babies her dogs. Then when she won year after year, people realized her dogs were better suited than others for the rigors of the race. That fundamentally changed how folks prepare for and run in the race now.”

Ericsson argues that the secret of winning is “deliberate practice,” where an expert coach (essentially what Susan Butcher was for her dogs) takes you through well-designed training over months or years, and you give it your full concentration.

Hours and hours of practice are necessary for great performance, but not sufficient. How experts in any domain pay attention while practicing makes a crucial difference. For instance, in his much-cited study of violinists—the one that showed the top tier had practiced more than 10,000 hours—Ericsson found the experts did so with full concentration on improving a particular aspect of their performance that a master teacher identified.3

Smart practice always includes a feedback loop that lets you recognize errors and correct them—which is why dancers use mirrors. Ideally that feedback comes from someone with an expert eye—and so every world-class sports champion has a coach. If you practice without such feedback, you don’t get to the top ranks.

The feedback matters and the concentration does, too—not just the hours.

Learning how to improve any skill requires top-down focus. Neuroplasticity, the strengthening of old brain circuits and building of new ones for a skill we are practicing, requires our paying attention: When practice occurs while we are focusing elsewhere, the brain does not rewire the relevant circuitry for that particular routine.

Daydreaming defeats practice; those of us who browse TV while working out will never reach the top ranks. Paying full attention seems to boost the mind’s processing speed, strengthen synaptic connections, and expand or create neural networks for what we are practicing.

At least at first. But as you master how to execute the new routine, repeated practice transfers control of that skill from the top-down system for intentional focus to bottom-up circuits that eventually make its execution effortless. At that point you don’t need to think about it—you can do the routine well enough on automatic.4

And this is where amateurs and experts part ways. Amateurs are content at some point to let their efforts become bottom-up operations. After about fifty hours of training—whether in skiing or driving—people get to that “good-enough” performance level, where they can go through the motions more or less effortlessly. They no longer feel the need for concentrated practice, but are content to coast on what they’ve learned. No matter how much more they practice in this bottom-up mode, their improvement will be negligible.

The experts, in contrast, keep paying attention top-down, intentionally counteracting the brain’s urge to automatize routines. They concentrate actively on those moves they have yet to perfect, on correcting what’s not working in their game, and on refining their mental models of how to play the game, or focusing on the particulars of feedback from a seasoned coach. Those at the top never stop learning: if at any point they start coasting and stop such smart practice, too much of their game becomes bottom-up and their skills plateau.

“The expert performer,” says Ericsson, “actively counteracts such tendencies toward automaticity by deliberately constructing and seeking out training in which the set goal exceeds their current level of performance.” Moreover, “The more time expert performers are able to invest in deliberate practice with full concentration, the further developed and refined their performance.”5

Susan Butcher was training herself and her sled dogs to operate as a high-performing unit. Throughout the year she and her dogs would go through a twenty-four-hour cycle of running and resting periods, then take two days off—rather than risk her dogs slowing down from being over-raced at the then-standard twelve hours. By the time they got to the Iditarod, she and her dogs were at peak conditioning.

Focused attention, like a strained muscle, gets fatigued. Ericsson finds world-class competitors—whether weight lifters, pianists, or a dog sled team—tend to limit arduous practice to about four hours a day. Rest and restoring physical and mental energy get built into their training regimen. They seek to push themselves and their bodies to the max, but not so much that their focus gets diminished in the practice session. Optimal practice maintains optimal concentration.

ATTENTION CHUNKS

When the Dalai Lama speaks to large audiences on his world tours, often at his side will be Thupten Jinpa, his main English-language interpreter. Jinpa listens with rapt attention while His Holiness speaks in Tibetan; he only occasionally jots a quick note. Then when there’s a pause, Jinpa repeats what was said in English, in his elegant Oxbridge accent.6

Those times that I’ve lectured abroad with the help of an interpreter, I’ve been told to speak only a few sentences before pausing for the interpreter to repeat my words in the local language. Otherwise there’s too much to remember.

But I happened to be present when this Tibetan duo was in front of a crowd of thousands, and the Dalai Lama seemed to be speaking in longer and longer chunks before pausing for the translation to English. At least once he went on in Tibetan for a full fifteen minutes before pausing. It seemed an impossibly long passage for any interpreter to track.

After the Dalai Lama finished, Jinpa was silent for several moments, as the audience stirred with palpable consternation at the memory challenge he faced.

Then Jinpa started his translation, and he, too, went on for fifteen minutes—without hesitation or even a pause. It was a breathtaking performance, one that moved the audience to applaud.

What’s the secret? When I asked Jinpa, he attributed his memory strengths to training he got as a young monk in a Tibetan Buddhist monastery in the south of India, where he was required to memorize long texts. “It starts when you’re just eight or nine,” he told me. “We tackle texts in classical Tibetan, which we don’t yet understand—it would be like memorizing Latin for a European monk. We memorize by the sound. Some of the texts are liturgical chants—you’ll see monks recite those chants completely from memory.”

Some of the texts young monks memorize are up to thirty pages long, with hundreds of pages of commentary. “We’d start with twenty lines we’d memorize in the morning, then repeat several times during the day with the text as a prompt. Then at night we’d recite the lines in the dark, completely from memory. The next day we’d add another twenty lines, and recite all forty—until we could recite the entire text.”

Smart practice maven Anders Ericsson has taught a similar talent to American college students, who by dint of sheer persistence learned to repeat back correctly up to 102 random digits (that level of digit recall took four hundred hours of focused practice). As Ericsson found, a keen attention lets learners find smarter ways to perform—whether at the keyboard or in the maze of the mind.

“When it comes to this application of attention,” Jinpa confided, “it takes some doggedness. You need persistence even though it may be boring.”

Such remarkable memorizationseemsto expand the capacity of working memory, where for a few seconds we store whatever we are paying attention to as we pass it on to long-term memory. But that seeming increase is not a true stretching of what we can hold in attention at any one moment. The secret is chunking—a form of smart practice.

“While His Holiness speaks,” Jinpa told me, “I know the gist of what he’s saying, and most of the time I know the particular text he’s talking about. I make a shorthand note for the key points, though I rarely consult the notes when I speak.” That shorthand indicates chunking.

As Herbert Simon, the late Nobel laureate and professor of computer science at Carnegie Mellon University, told me some years ago, “Every expert has acquired something like this memory ability” within her specialty. “Memory is like an index; experts have approximately 50,000 chunks of familiar units of information they recognize. For a physician, many of those chunks are symptoms.”7

IN THE MENTAL GYM

Think of attention as a mental muscle that we can strengthen by a workout. Memorization works that muscle, as does concentration. The mental analog of lifting a free weight over and over is noticing when our mind wanders and bringing it back to target.

That happens to be the essence of one-pointed focus in meditation, which, seen through the lens of cognitive neuroscience, typically involves attention training. You’re told to keep your focus on one thing, such as a mantra or your breath. Try it for a while and inevitably your mind wanders off.

So the universal instructions are these: when your mind wanders—and you notice that it has wandered—bring it back to your point of focus and sustain your attention there. And when your mind wanders off again, do the same. And again. And again. And again.

Neuroscientists at Emory University used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to study the brains of meditators going through this simple movement of mind.8There are four steps in this cognitive cycle: the mind wanders, you notice it’s wandering, you shift your attention to your breath, and you keep it there.

During mind wandering the brain activates the usual medial circuitry. At the moment you notice your mind has wandered, another attention network, this one for salience, perks up. And as you shift focus back to your breath and keep it there, prefrontal cognitive control circuits take over.

As in any workout, the more reps the stronger the muscle becomes. More-experienced meditators, one study found, were able to deactivate their medial strip more rapidly after noticing mind wandering; as their thoughts become less “sticky” with practice, it becomes easier to drop thoughts and return to the breath. There was more neural connectivity between the region for mind wandering and those that disengage attention.9The increased connectivity in the brains of the long-term meditators, this study suggests, are analogous to those competitive weight lifters with the perfect pecs.

Muscle builders know you won’t get a six-pack belly by lifting free weights—you need to do a particular set of crunches that work the relevant muscles. Specific muscles respond to particular training regimens. So it is with attention training. Concentration on one point of focus is the basic attention builder, but that strength can be applied in many different ways.

In the mental gym, as in any fitness training, the specifics of practice make all the difference.

ACCENTUATE THE POSITIVE

Larry David, creator of the hit sitcomsSeinfeldandCurb Your Enthusiasm, hails from Brooklyn but has lived most of his life in Los Angeles. On a rare stay in Manhattan to film episodes forCurb—in which he plays himself—David went to see a ball game at Yankee Stadium.

During a lull in the game, cameras sent his image up to gigantic Jumbotron screens. The entire stadium of fans stood to cheer him.

But as David was leaving later that night, in the parking lot someone leaned out of a passing car and yelled “Larry, you suck!”

On the way home, Larry David obsessed about that one encounter: “Who’s that guy? What was that? Who would do that? Why would you say something like that?”

It was as though those fifty thousand adoring fans didn’t exist—there was just that one guy.10

Negativity focuses us on a narrow range—what’s upsetting us.11A rule of thumb in cognitive therapy holds that focusing on the negatives in experience offers a recipe for depression. Cogitive therapy treatments might well encourage someone like Larry David to bring to mind his good feelings when the crowd went crazy for him, and hold his focus there.

Positive emotions widen our span of attention; we’re free to take it all in. Indeed, in the grip of positivity, our perceptions shift. As psychologist Barbara Fredrickson, who studies positive feelings and their effects, puts it, when we’re feeling good our awareness expands from our usual self-centered focus on “me” to a more inclusive and warm focus on “we.”12

Focusing on the negatives or positives offers us a bit of leverage in determining how our brain operates. When we’re in an upbeat, energized mood, Richard Davidson has found, our brain’s left prefrontal area lights up. The left area also harbors circuitry that reminds us how great we’ll feel when we finally reach some long-sought goal—the circuitry that helps keep a graduate student slogging away at a daunting dissertation.

At the neural level, positivity reflects how long we can sustain this outlook. One technical measure, for instance, assesses how long people hold a smile after seeing someone help a person in distress or after watching an exuberant toddler prancing about.

This sunny outlook shows up in attitudes: for example, that moving to a new city or meeting new people is an adventure opening up exciting possibilities—wonderful places to discover, new friends—rather than a scary step. When life brings a surprising positive moment, such as a warm conversation, the pleasant mood lasts and lasts.

As you might expect, people who experience life in this light focus on the silver lining, not just the clouds. The opposite, cynicism, breeds pessimism: not just a focus on the cloud, but the conviction that there are even darker ones lurking behind. It all depends on where you focus: the one mean fan, or the fifty thousand cheering ones.

In part positivity reflects the brain’s reward circuitry in action. When we’re happy, the nucleus accumbens, a region within the ventral striatum in the middle of the brain, activates. This circuitry seems vital for motivation and having a sense that what you’re doing is rewarding. Rich in dopamine, these circuits are a driver of positive feeling, striving toward our goals, and desire.

This combines with the brain’s own opiates, which include endorphins (the runner’s-high neurotransmitters). The dopamine may fuel our drive and persistence, while the opiates tag that with a feeling of pleasure.

These circuits remain active while we stay positive. In a telling study comparing people with depression and healthy volunteers, Davidson found that after seeing a happy scene those with depression could not maintain the resulting positive feelings—their reward circuitry shut off much sooner.13Our executive area can trigger this circuit, making us better able to sustain positive feeling, as in keeping going despite setbacks, or just grinding away toward a goal that makes us smile when we picture what reaching it will be like. And positivity, in turn, has great payoffs for performance, energizing us so we can focus better, think more flexibly, and persevere.

Here’s a question: If everything worked out perfectly in your life, what would you be doing in ten years?

That query invites us to dream a little, to consider what really matters to us and how that might guide our lives.

“Talking about your positive goals and dreams activates brain centers that open you up to new possibilities. But if you change the conversation to what you should do to fix yourself, it closes you down,” says Richard Boyatzis, a psychologist at the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University (and a friend and colleague since we met in graduate school).

To explore these contrasting effects in personal coaching, Boyatzis and colleagues scanned the brains of college students being interviewed.14For some, the interview focused on positives like that question about what they’d love to be doing in ten years, and what they hoped to gain from their college years. The brain scans revealed that during the positively focused interviews there was greater activity in the brain’s reward circuitry and areas for good feeling and happy memories. Think of this as a neural signature of the openness we feel when we are inspired by a vision.

For others the interview focus was more negative: how demanding they found their schedule and their assignments, difficulties making friends, and fears about their performance. As the students wrestled with the more negative questions their brain activated areas that generate anxiety, mental conflict, sadness.

A focus on our strengths, Boyatzis argues, urges us toward a desired future and stimulates openness to new ideas, people, and plans. In contrast, spotlighting our weaknesses elicits a defensive sense of obligation and guilt, closing us down.

The positive lens keeps the joy in practice and learning—the reason even the most seasoned athletes and performers still enjoy rehearsing their moves. “You need the negative focus to survive, but a positive one to thrive,” says Boyatzis. “You need both, but in the right ratio.”

That ratio would do well to flip far more to the positive than the negative, in light of what’s known as the “Losada effect,” after Marcial Losada, an organizational psychologist who studied emotions in high-performing business teams. Analyzing hundreds of teams, Losada determined that the most effective had a positive/negative ratio of at least 2.9 good feelings to every negative moment (there’s an upper limit to positivity: above a Losada ratio of about 11:1, teams apparently become too giddy to be effective).15The same ratio range holds for people who flourish in life, according to research by Barbara Fredrickson, who is a psychologist at the University of North Carolina (and a former research associate of Losada).16

Boyatzis makes the case that this positivity bias applies as well to coaching—whether by a teacher, a parent, a boss, or an executive coach.

A conversation that starts with a person’s dreams and hopes can lead to a learning path yielding that vision. This conversation might extract some concrete goals from the general vision, then look at what it would take to accomplish those goals—and what capacities we might want to work on improving to get there.

That contrasts with a more common approach that focuses on a person’s weaknesses—whether bad grades or missing quarterly targets—and what to do to remedy them. This conversation focuses us on what’s wrong with us—our failings and what we have to do to “fix” ourselves—and all the feelings of guilt, fear, and the like that go along. One of the worst versions of this approach occurs when parents punish a child for bad grades until he improves. The anxiety associated with being punished actually hampers the child’s prefrontal cortex while he is trying to concentrate and learn, creating further impediment to improvement.

In the courses he teaches at Case for MBA students and mid-career executives, Boyatzis has been applying dreams-first coaching for many years. To be sure, dreams alone are not enough: you have to practice any new needed abilities at every naturally occurring opportunity. In a given day that might mean anything from zero to a dozen chances to practice the routine you’re trying to master on the way to your dream. Those moments add up.

One manager, an executive MBA student, wanted to build better relationships. “He had an engineering background,” Boyatzis told me. “Give him a task and all he saw was the task, not the people he worked with to get it done.”

So his learning plan became: “Spend time thinking about how the other person feels.” To get regular, low-risk opportunities for this practice outside his work and the habits he had there, he helped coach his son’s soccer team and tried to focus on the players’ feelings while he coached.

Another executive took up tutoring for the same learning agenda, volunteering in a high school in a poor neighborhood. He used this opportunity, says Boyatzis, “to help himself learn to be more attuned and ‘gentle’ when helping others”—a new habit he brought into his workplace. He enjoyed tutoring so much he signed on for several more rounds.

To get data on how well this works, Boyatzis does systematic ratings of those going through the course. Coworkers or others who know them well anonymously rate the students on dozens of specific behaviors that display one or another of the emotional intelligence competencies typical of high-performers (for example: “Understands others by listening attentively”). Then he tracks the students down years later and has them rated again by those who now work with them.

“By now we’ve done twenty-six separate longitudinal studies, tracking people down wherever they work now,” Boyatzis tells me. “We’ve found that the improvements students make in their first round hold up as long as seven years later.”

Whether we’re trying to hone a skill in sports or music, enhance our memory power, or listen better, the core elements of smart practice are the same: ideally, a potent combination of joy, smart tactics, and full focus.

As we’ve explored the three varieties of focus, we’ve also heard about ways to enhance each. Smart practice gets to a more fundamental level, cultivating the basics of attention upon which the triple focus builds.

16

BRAINS ON GAMES

Daniel Cates, a world champion, began his dedicated training routine at age six. That was when he first discovered his natural affinity for the video game Command & Conquer, which in those days came free, bundled with Microsoft Windows. From then on Cates disdained playing with other kids, preferring to spend hours commanding and conquering in the basement of his family’s suburban home.1

At the math-and-science high school he attended, Cates would cut class and find his way to the computer room to play the puzzle game Minesweeper. The game requires locating mines hidden in an opaque grid and flagging them—without exposing one and getting blown up. Although he was just so-so when he started playing the game, endless hours of practice made Cates able to clear all the mines within ninety seconds—a feat that seemed impossible to him when he started learning the game (and utterly inconceivable to me when I just tried to play the game online; give it a go and you’ll see).

At sixteen, he discovered his métier: online poker. In just eighteen months Cates went from losing five-dollar games in live-action kitchen poker to winning up to $500,000 online poker purses (and just in time—within a few years online poker became the target of laws against it, at least in the United States). By the time he was twenty, Cates had won $5.5 million at the game, $1 million more than the second-highest player’s reported earnings that year.2

Cates earned that remarkable sum by “grinding” (as in grinding away), playing not just game after game, but multiple simultaneous games, with all comers, including the most expert. Online poker lets you play as many opponents as you can handle simultaneously, with instant win-lose feedback, which fast-tracks the learning curve. A teenager who can play a dozen online hands at a time accrues as much cumulative practice at the game’s subtleties in a few short years as a lifetime gambler in his fifties who plays only the tables in Vegas.

Cates’s gift for poker very likely built on the cognitive scaffolding started back when he dived into Command & Control as a first grader. Winning that battle game requires speedy cognitive processing of factors like how your troops can be deployed against your opponent’s, vigilance in picking up cues of when your enemy has just begun to weaken, and mercilessly attacking. Just before his switch to poker Cates was a world champion at Command & Control; the attention skills and killer instinct that made him a champ transferred readily to the card game.

But in his twenties Cates woke up to the barrenness of his social world and nonexistent romantic life. He began a search for a lifestyle that would let him enjoy his winnings. What would that mean?

“Exercise. Girls,” as he put it.

Being world class in the online zone offers little help on singles night at the local bar. Video game strengths like rampant aggression at an opponent’s first sign of weakness transfer poorly to the dating scene.

Last I heard, Cates was reading my bookSocial Intelligence.I wish him well. The book argues that interactions like those during online poker lack a vital learning loop for the interpersonal circuits of the brain that help us connect and, say, make a good impression on a first meeting.

“Neurons that fire together wire together,” as psychologist Donald Hebb neatly put it back in the 1940s. The brain is plastic, constantly resculpting its circuitry as we go through our day. Whatever we are doing, as we do it our brain strengthens some circuits and not others.

In face-to-face interactions our social circuitry picks up a multitude of cues and signals that help us connect well, and wire together the neurons involved. But during thousands of hours spent online, the wiring of the social brain gets virtually no exercise.

BOOSTS TO BRAIN POWER OR DAMAGE TO THE MIND?

“The majority of our socialization is flowing through machines,” says Marc Smith, a founder of the Social Media Research Foundation, “and that opens up great opportunities and many concerns.”3While “majority” seems an overstatement, debates rage about both the opportunity and the concerns, with video games an epicenter of debate.

A running stream of studies proclaim on the one hand that such games damage the mind, or on the other that they boost brainpower. Are those who argue the games give kids a sinister training in aggression right? Or, as others propose, do the games train vital attention skills? Or both?

To help settle the matter, the prestigious journalNatureconvened half a dozen experts to sort out the benefits from the harms.4Turns out it’s like the effects of food—it all depends: some are nutritious; too much of others can be toxic. For video games the answers hinge on the specifics of which game strengthens what brain circuitry in a given way.

Take, for instance, those hyperactive auto races and rapid-fire battles. The data on such action games shows enhancements in visual attention, speed of processing information, object tracking, and switching from one mental task to another. Many such games even seem to offer a silent tutorial in statistical inference—that is, sensing the odds that you can beat the enemies given your resources and their numbers.

And more generally, various games have been found to improve visual acuity and spatial perception, attention switching, decision-making, and the ability to track objects (though many of those studies do not let us know if people drawn to the games are already a bit better at such mental skills, or whether the games improved them).

Games that offer increasingly harder cognitive challenges—more accurate and challenging judgments and reactions at higher speeds, fully focused attention, increasing spans of working memory—drive positive brain changes.

“When you constantly need to scan the screen to detect little differences (because they may signal an enemy) and then orient attention to that area, you become better at those attentional skills,” says Douglas Gentile, a cognitive scientist at the Media Research Lab at Iowa State University.5

But, he adds, these skills do not necessarily transfer well to life outside the video screen. Though they might have great value for specific jobs, such as air traffic controllers, they are no help when it comes to ignoring the fidgety kid sitting next to you so you can focus on your reading. Fast-paced games, some experts argue, might acclimate some children to a stimulation rate quite unlike that in the classroom, a formula for even more than usual school boredom.

Although video games may strengthen attention skills like rapidly filtering out visual distractions, they do little to amp up a more crucial skill for learning, sustaining focus on a gradually evolving body of information—such as paying attention in class and understanding what you’re reading, and how it ties in to what you learned last week or year.

There’s a negative correlation between the hours a kid spends gaming and how well he does in school, very likely in direct ratio to time stolen from studies. When 3,034 Singaporean children and adolescents were followed for two years, those who became extreme gamers showed increases in anxiety, depression, and social phobia, and a drop in grades. But if they stopped their gaming habit, all those problems decreased.6

Then there’s the downside of playing countless hours of games that fine-tune the brain for a rapid, violent response.7Some dangers here, the expert panel says, have been exaggerated in the popular press: violent games may increase low-level aggression, but such games in themselves are not going to turn a well-raised kid into a violent one. Yet when the games are played by children who, for example, have been the victim of physical abuse at home (and so are more prone to violence themselves), there might be a dangerous synergism—though no one can as yet predict with any certainty in which child this toxic chemistry will occur.

Still, hours spent battling hordes intent on killing you understandably encourage “hostile attribution bias,” the instant assumption that the kid who bumped you in the hallway has a grudge. Just as troubling, violent gamers show lessened concern when witnessing people being mean, as in bullying.

Given that the paranoid vigilance such games encourage can occasionally mix tragically with the agitation and confusion of the mentally disturbed, do we want to be feeding our young from this mental menu?

The recent generations raised on games and otherwise glued to video screens, one neuroscientist told me, amount to an unprecedented experiment: “a massive difference in how their brains are plastically engaged in life” compared with previous generations. The long-term question is what such games will do to their neural wiring, and so to the social fabric—and how this might either develop new strengths or warp healthy development.

On the upside, the demand that a player keep focused despite snazzy distracting lures enhances executive function, whether for sheer concentration now or resisting impulse later. If you add to the game’s mix a need to cooperate and coordinate with other players, you’ve got a rehearsal of some valuable social skills.

Kids who play games that require cooperation show more helpfulness in the course of a day. Perhaps those purely violent, me-against-all games could be redesigned so that a winning strategy demanded coming to the aid of those in trouble and finding helpers and allies—not just a hostile scan.

SMART GAMES

The popular app Angry Birds lures millions of people into cumulative billions of hours of concentrated finger-flicking. If neurons that fire together wire together, you have to wonder just what mental skills, if any, are getting fine-tuned when your kids (or you) spend all that time lost in Angry Birds.

The brain learns and remembers best when focus is greatest. Video games focus attention and get us to repeat moves over and over, and so are powerful tutorials. That presents an opportunity for training the brain.

Michael Posner’s group at the University of Oregon gave children four to six years old five days of attention training, in sessions lasting up to forty minutes each. Part of the time they were playing a game where they used a joystick to control a cat on a screen that was trying to catch small moving objects.

Although these three-plus hours of practice seem fairly short to track a change in the neural networks for attention, brain wave data suggested a shift in the activity of the circuitry for executive attention, toward levels seen in adults.8

The conclusion: target kids with the poorest attention for such training—those with autism, attention deficit, and other learning problems—since they stand to benefit the most. And beyond remedial lessons, Posner’s group proposes that attention training should be part of the education of every child, giving a boost in learning across the board.

Those who, like Posner, see such potential brain training benefits propose that specially designed games could improve everything from visual tracking in “lazy eye” (known technically as amblyopia) to the hand-eye coordination of surgeons. A deficiency in the alerting network, research suggests, underlies attention deficit disorder; problems in orienting are seen in the fixations of autism.9

In the Netherlands, eleven-year-olds with ADHD played a computer game demanding heightened attention: they had to be vigilant for enemy bots popping up, for instance, and stay alert to when their own avatar’s energy was getting too low.10After just eight one-hour sessions they were better able to focus despite distractions (and not just while playing the game).

At their best, “video games are controlled training regimens delivered in highly motivating” ways that result in “enduring physical and functional neurological remodeling,” says Michael Merzenich, a neuroscientist at the University of California, San Francisco, who has led the design of games meant to retrain the brains of older people with neurological deficits like memory loss and dementia.11

Ben Shapiro, who was in charge of worldwide drug discovery—including neuroscience—at Merck Research Laboratories, has joined the board of a company designing games that increase concentration and minimize distractions. He sees advantages in using smart practice rather than medication for such purposes. “Games like this could slow the loss of key cognitive functions with aging,” Shapiro tells me.

He adds, “If you want to make people’s mental lives better, work directly with mental targets, rather than molecular ones—drugs are a shotgun approach, since nature uses the same molecules for many different purposes.”

Dr. Merzenich puts little stock in the rather random—and decidedly mixed—benefits of off-the-shelf games, preferring to tailor ones that target a specific set of cognitive skills. A new generation of brain training apps, Douglas Gentile proposes, would apply smart practice techniques familiar to superb teachers:

•   clear objectives at progressively more difficult levels

•   adapting to the pace of the specific learner

•   immediate feedback and graduated practice challenges to the point of mastery

•   practicing the same skills in different contexts, encouraging skill transference

One day in the future, some predict, brain training games will be a standard part of schooling, with the best ones gathering data about the players as they simultaneously fine-tune themselves into the exact game needed—an empathic cognitive tutor. In the meantime, experts ruefully admit, the money spent on such education apps pales compared with budgets of gaming corporations—and so at present even the best brain training tools are sad echoes of the pizzazz of a Grand Theft Auto.But there are signs that may be changing.

I just watched my four grandchildren, one by one, play the beta version of a game for the iPad calledTenacity. The game offers you a leisurely journey through any of a half dozen scenes, from a barren desert to a fantasy staircase spiraling heavenward.

The challenge: Every time you exhale, you tap the iPad screen with one finger. And for every fifth exhalation you tap with two fingers—at least at the beginning level.

At the time, the grandchildren ranged in age from six, eight, and a newly minted twelve to an about-to-be fourteen. They offer what amounts to a natural experiment in brain maturation and attention.

The six-year-old goes first. He picks the desert scene, which puts him on a slow amble along a path through sand dunes, palms, and mud-daubed domiciles. The first try he had to be reminded of what to do; by the third he had gotten pretty good at coordinating his taps with his breath—though he still sometimes forgot the double taps.

Even so, he was delighted to see a field of roses slowly emerge from the desert sand every time he got it right.

A staircase spiraling through the sky was the choice of our eight-year-old. As the staircase unwound itself upward, there were occasional distractions: a helicopter flies into view, does a flip, and flies off; later a plane, a flock of birds—and at the highest altitude, various satellites. She stays intent on her tapping for the full ten minutes, despite having a bit of a fever that day.

The next grandchild, just turned twelve, picks a staircase in space, where the distractions include planets, asteroid showers, and meteorites. While her younger two siblings had helped get their taps right by controlling their breathing and counting aloud, she just breathes naturally.

And the last, soon to be fourteen, picks the desert scene and executes the whole routine effortlessly. At the end, she tells me, “I feel calm and relaxed—I like this game.”

Indeed, all of them had immediately become enrapt, attuning to their breathing and the rhythm of their finger taps. “I felt really focused,” the twelve-year-old reported. “I want to do it again.”

That’s exactly what the game designers hoped for.Tenacity, Davidson tells me, was developed by an award-winning game design group at the University of Wisconsin, with his input. “We took what we were learning about focus and calming in our contemplative neuroscience studies, and put it into a game so kids could get the benefits.”

Tenacitystrengthens selective attention, “the building block for all other kinds of learning,” he added. “The self-regulation of attention lets you focus on explicit goals and resist distraction,” a key to success in any domain.

“If we can create a game kids want to play, it will be an efficient way to train attention, given how much time kids spend playing and how naturally it comes to them,” says Davidson, who heads the University’s Center for Investigating Healthy Minds. “They’ll love doing the homework.”

Stanford University has a Calming Technology Lab, which focuses on gadgets that embed mindful, quieting focus. With one such calmer, “breathware,” you wear a belt that detects your breath rate. Should a chock-full inbox trigger what the developer calls “email apnea,” an iPhone app guides you through focusing exercises that calm your breath—and mind.

Stanford’s Institute of Design offers a graduate course called “Designing Calm.” As one of the teachers, Gus Tai, says, ‘A lot of Silicon Valley tech is oriented toward distracting. But with calming tech, we’re asking how we can bring more balance to the world.”12

17

BREATHING BUDDIES

Drive to the dead end at the farthest reach of a street on the east side of New York City’s Spanish Harlem and you find an elementary school, P.S. 112, snuggled between the FDR Drive, a Catholic church, a parking lot for big-box stores, and the massive Robert F. Wagner low-income housing compound.

The kindergartners through second graders who attend P.S. 112 come from hardscrabble homes, many in those low-income apartments. When a seven-year-old there mentioned in class that he knew someone who had been shot, the teacher asked how many other children knew a shooting victim. Every hand went up.

As you enter P.S. 112, you sign in at a desk manned by a police officer, albeit a kindly older woman. But if you walk down the halls as I did one morning, what’s most striking is the atmosphere: looking into classrooms I found the children sitting still, calm and quiet, absorbed in their work or listening to their teacher.

When I drop by Room 302, the second-grade classroom of co-teachers Emily Hoaldridge and Nicolle Rubin, I witness one ingredient in the recipe for the halcyon atmosphere: breathing buddies.

The twenty-two second graders sit doing their math, three or four to a table, when Miss Emily strikes a melodious chime. On cue, the kids silently gather on a large rug, sitting in rows, cross-legged, facing the two teachers. One girl goes over to the classroom door, puts aDO NOT DISTURBsign on the outside knob, and closes it.

Then, still in silence, the teachers hold up Popsicle sticks one by one, each with a student’s name—a signal for the pupils to go individually over to their cubbies and bring back their special, fist-sized stuffed animals: striped tigers, a pink pig, a yellow puppy, a purple donkey. The boys and girls find a spot on the floor to lie down, put their stuffed animal buddy on their belly, and wait, hands to their sides.

They follow the directions of a man’s friendly voice leading them through some deep belly breathing, as they count to themselves, “one, two, three,” while they take a long exhalation and inhalation.1Then they squeeze and relax their eyes; stretch their mouth wide open, sticking out their tongue; and squeeze their hands into a ball, relaxing each in turn. It ends with the voice saying, “Now sit up, and feel relaxed,” and as they do, they all seem to be just that.

Another chime, and still in silence the kids on cue take their places in a circle on the rug, and report on what they experienced: “It feels nice inside.” “I felt very lazy because it calmed my body.” “It made me have happy thoughts.”

The orderliness of the exercise and the calm focus in the classroom make it hard to believe eleven of the twenty-two kids are classified as having “special needs”: cognitive impairments like dyslexia, speech difficulties or partial deafness, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, points on the autism spectrum.

“We’ve got many kids with problems, but when we do this, they don’t act out,” says Miss Emily. But the week before, a glitch in the school day meant Room 302 skipped this ritual. “It was like they were a different class,” says Miss Emily. “They couldn’t sit still; they were all over the place.”

“Our school has some kids who are highly distractible,” says the school principal, Eileen Reiter. “This helps them relax and focus. We also give them regular movement breaks—all these strategies help.”

For example, says Reiter, “Instead of using time-outs, we teach kids to take ‘time-ins,’ to manage their feelings,” part of an emphasis on teaching the students to self-regulate rather than relying on punishments and rewards. And when children do have problems, she adds, “We’ll ask them what they could do differently next time.”

Breathing buddies is part of the Inner Resilience Program, a legacy of the attacks on the World Trade Center on September 11, 2001. Thousands of children in schools near the twin towers were evacuated as the buildings went up in flames. Many hiked miles up the emptied West Side Highway, their teachers walking backward to be sure the children were not looking at the horrific specter behind.

In the months afterward, the Red Cross asked Linda Lantieri—whose conflict resolution program had already been successful in many schools—to design a program to help the children (and teachers) regain their composure after 9/11. The Inner Resilience Program, along with a range of social and emotional learning methods, “has transformed the school,” Reiter says. “It’s a very calm place. And when kids are calm, they learn better.

“The biggest piece is getting the kids to self-regulate,” principal Reiter adds. “Because we are an early childhood school, we help students learn how to put their problems in perspective and develop strategies to resolve them. They learn to size up how big a problem is, like getting teased or bullied—it’s big when someone hurts your feelings. Or middle-sized, like being frustrated with your schoolwork. They can match the problem to a strategy.”

The classrooms in P.S. 112 all have a “peace corner,” a special place where any child who needs to can retreat for time alone to calm down. “Sometimes they just need a break, a few moments alone,” Reiter adds. “But you’ll see a child who is really frustrated or upset go over to the peace corner and apply some strategies they’ve learned. The big lesson is to tune in and know what to do to care for yourself.”

While five- to seven-year-olds get instruction in the breathing buddies exercise, from eight and up they practice mindfulness of breathing, which has proven benefits both for sustaining attention and for the circuitry that calms us down. This combination of calm and concentration creates an optimal inner state for focus and learning.

Evaluations of a one-semester version of the program found that the children who need greatest help—those at “high risk” for derailing in life—benefited the most: significant boosts in attention and perceptual sensitivity, and drops in aggressiveness, downbeat moods, and frustration with school.2What’s more, teachers who used the program increased their sense of well-being, auguring well for the learning atmosphere of their classrooms.

THE STOPLIGHT

In a preschool, songs play as eight three-year-olds sit at a low table, each one coloring in the thick outline of a clown. Suddenly the music stops—and so do the kids.

That moment captures a learning opportunity for any three-year-old’s prefrontal cortex, the site where executive functions like squelching an unruly impulse take root. One of those abilities, cognitive control, holds a key to a well-lived life.

Stopping on cue is the holy grail of cognitive control. The better children are at stopping when the music stops—or making the right move and not the wrong one while playing Simon Says—the stronger their prefrontal wiring for cognitive control becomes.

Here’s a test of cognitive control. Quick now, in what direction is the middle arrow pointing in each row?

When people take this test under laboratory conditions there are detectable differences (as measured in thousandths of a second—not so detectable by you or me) between them in the speed with which they name the middle arrow’s direction. The test, called the “Flanker” for the distracting arrows that flank the target one, gauges a child’s susceptibility to distractions disrupting concentration. Focusing on the middle arrow going to the left and ignoring all the others headed right takes lots of cognitive control for a youngster, especially over the arduous course of a series of arrays like this.

Kids gone wild—the ones whom frustrated teachers kick out of their class, or want to—suffer from a deficit in these circuits; their whims dictate their acts. But rather than punishing kids for this, why not give them lessons that help them manage themselves better? For instance, preschoolers who had sessions learning to focus on their breath showed more accurate and faster performance on the Flanker.3

Perhaps no mental skill—as the New Zealand study found—matters as much in life success as executive control. Kids who can ignore impulse, filter out what’s irrelevant, and stay focused on a goal fare best in life. There’s an education app for that. It’s called “social and emotional learning,” or SEL.

When second and third graders in a Seattle school are getting upset, they’re told to think of a traffic signal. Red light means stop—calm down. Take a long, deep breath and as you calm down a bit, tell yourself what the problem is and how you feel.

The yellow light reminds them to slow down and think of several possible ways they might solve the problem, then choose which is best. The green light signals them to try out that plan, and see how it works.

I first encountered stoplight posters when I was touring the New Haven, Connecticut, public schools while writing an article for theNew York Times—well before I appreciated the crucial attention training the poster guides kids through. The stoplight rehearses the shift from bottom-up, amygdala-driven impulse to top-down, prefrontal executive-driven attention.

The stoplight exercise was the brainchild of Roger Weissberg, a psychologist then at Yale who in the late 1980s developed a pioneering program called “social development” for New Haven’s public schools. Now that same image can be found on the walls of countless thousands of classrooms worldwide.

And for good reason. Back then there was only spotty data suggesting that getting kids to respond this way to their anger and anxiety had positive impact. But now that case has become about as strong as any in social science.

A meta-analysis of more than two hundred schools with social and emotional learning programs like New Haven’s social development curriculum compared them with similar schools without such programs.4The findings for those with the programs: classroom disruption and misbehavior down 10 percent, attendance and other positive behavior up 10 percent—and achievement test scores boosted by 11 percent.

In that Seattle school the stoplight exercise was coupled with another. The second and third graders were regularly shown cards of faces with different expressions and their names. The kids talked about what it’s like to have one of those feelings—to be mad or scared or happy.

These “feeling face” cards tone up a seven-year-old’s emotional self-awareness; they connect the word for a feeling with its image, and then with their own experience. That simple cognitive act has neural impact: the brain’s right hemisphere recognizes the feelings depicted, while the left understands the name and what it means.

Emotional self-awareness requires putting all that together via cross-talk in the corpus callosum, the tissue that connects the brain’s left and right sides. The stronger the connectivity across this neural bridge, the more fully we can understand our emotions.

Being able to name your feelings and put that together with your memories and associations turns out to be crucial for self-control. Learning to speak, developmental psychologists have found, lets children call on their innerdon’tto replace the voice of their parents’ in managing unruly impulses.

As a duo the stoplight and the feeling cards build two synergistic neural tools for impulse control. The stoplight strengthens circuitry between the prefrontal cortex—the brain’s executive center, just behind the forehead—and the midbrain limbic centers, that cauldron of id-driven impulses. The feeling faces encourage connectivity across the two halves of the brain, boosting the ability to reason about feelings. This up-down, left-right linkage knits a child’s brain together, seamlessly integrating systems that, if left to themselves, create the chaotic universe of a three-year-old.5

In younger children these neural connections are still budding (these brain circuits don’t finally finish maturing until the mid-twenties), which explains kids’ zany, sometimes maddening antics, where their whims drive their actions. But between ages five and eight, children’s brains have a growth spurt in their impulse control circuits. The ability to think about their impulses and just say “no” to them makes third graders less wild than those boisterous first graders down the hall. The Seattle project’s design took full advantage of this neural building boom.

But why wait until grade school? These inhibitory circuits start to develop from birth. Walter Mischel taught four-year-olds how to resist those luscious marshmallows by seeing them differently—for example, focusing on their color. And Mischel is the first to say that even a four-year-old who just can’t wait and grabs the marshmallow right off the bat can still learn to delay gratification—impulsivity is not necessarily something he’s stuck with for life.

In a day when online shopping and instant messages encourage gratification now, kids need more help with that practice. One strong conclusion by the scientists who studied the Dunedin, New Zealand, kids was the need for interventions that boost self-control, particularly during early childhood and the teen years. The SEL programs fill the bill, covering the years from kindergarten through high school.6

It’s intriguing that Singapore has become the first country in the world to require every one of its students go through an SEL program. The tiny city-state represents one of the great economic success stories of the last fifty years, as a paternalistic government built a diminutive nation into an economic powerhouse.

Singapore has no natural resources, no great army, no special political sway. Its secret lies in its people—and the government has intentionally cultivated these human resources as the driver of its economy. Schools are the incubator for Singapore’s outstanding workforce. With an eye toward the future, Singapore has partnered with Roger Weissberg, now president of the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning, to design emotional intelligence–based lesson plans for its schools.

And for good reason: one conclusion by economists involved in the Dunedin study was that teaching all kids these skills could shift an entire nation’s income up a few notches, with added gains in their health and a lower crime rate.

MINDFULNESS-BASED EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE

The attention training that kids get at P.S. 112 mixes well with the rest of the Inner Resilience Program, which stands as a model of best practices in the social and emotional learning movement. I became a cofounder of the Collaborative for Academic, Social, and Emotional Learning—the group that has facilitated these programs’ spread to thousands of school districts throughout the world—while writing my bookEmotional Intelligence.

I saw lessons in emotional intelligence—that is, in self-awareness, self-management, empathy, and social skills—as synergistic with standard academic courses. Now I’m realizing that the basics of attention training are a next step, a low-tech method for boosting neural circuitry at the heart of emotional intelligence.

“I’ve done SEL for years,” Linda Lantieri tells me. “When I added the mindfulness piece, I saw a dramatically quicker embodiment of calming ability and the readiness to learn. It happens at earlier ages, and earlier in the school year.”

There seems to be a natural synergy between SEL and attention training like mindfulness. When I spoke with Weissberg, he told me the organization had just undertaken a review of the impacts of mindfulness in SEL programs.

“Cognitive control and executive function seem crucial for self-awareness and self-management, as well as academics,” Weissberg said.

Deliberate, top-down attention holds a key to self-management. The parts of the brain for such executive function mature rapidly from the preschool years to about second grade (and the growth of these neural networks continues into early adulthood). These circuits manage both “hot” processing of emotional moments and “cool” processing of more neutral information, like academics.7This circuitry seems surprisingly plastic throughout childhood, suggesting that interventions like SEL can enhance it.

One study taught attention skills to four- and six-year-olds in just five sessions of playing games that exercise visual tracking (guessing where a duck swimming underwater will surface), spotting a target cartoon character within an array of distractions, and inhibiting impulse (clicking if a sheep comes out from behind a bale of hay, but not if a wolf emerges).8

The finding: the neural scaffolding for both emotional and cognitive abilities was enhanced. The brains of four-year-olds who got this brief training resembled those of six-year-olds, and those of the trained six-year-olds were well on their way to neural executive function seen in adults.

Though a gene controls the maturation of the brain regions that handle executive attention, such genes are in turn regulated by experience—and this training seems to have sped their activity. The circuitry that manages all this—which runs between the anterior cingulate and the prefrontal areas—is active in both emotional and cognitive varieties of attention regulation: managing emotional impulse as well as aspects of IQ like nonverbal reasoning and fluid thinking.

An older dichotomy in psychology between “cognitive” and “noncognitive” abilities would put academic skills in a separate category from social and emotional ones. But given how the neural scaffolding for executive control underlies both academic and social/emotional skills, that separation seems as antiquated as the Cartesian split between mind and body. In the design of the brain they are highly interactive, not fully independent. Kids who can’t pay attention can’t learn; they also can’t manage themselves well.

“When you have elements like regular quiet time,” says Lantieri, “a Peace Corner where kids can go on their own when they need to calm down, and mindfulness, you get more calmness and self-management on the one hand, and enhanced focus and the ability to sustain it on the other. You change their physiology and self-awareness.”

By teaching kids the skills that help them calm down and focus, “we lay a foundation of self-awareness and self-management on which you can scaffold the other SEL skills like active listening, identifying feelings, and so on.

Back when SEL started, Lantieri tells me, “We were expecting kids to use their SEL skills when they were hijacked, but they couldn’t access them. Now we realize they need a more basic tool first: cognitive control. That’s what they get with breathing buddies and mindfulness. Once they experience how this can help them, they get the confidence, ‘I can do this.’

“Some kids use it during tests—they wear a Biodot,” a small plastic dot that changes color as skin temperature (and so blood flow to that area) shifts. This “tells them when they are getting too anxious to think well on the test. If it says they need to, they use the mindfulness to calm and focus themselves, and then go back to the test when they can think more clearly.

“The kids understand that when they don’t do well on a test, it’s not because they are stupid, but that ‘When I’m super-nervous it’s in there but I can’t access it. But I know how to focus and calm—then I’ll get to it.’ They have the attitude I’m in charge of myself now—I know what to do that can help.”

The Inner Resilience Program is in schools from Youngstown, Ohio, to Anchorage, Alaska. “It works best,” Lantieri says, “when combined with an SEL program—all these places do that.”

CUTTING THROUGH THE HODGEPODGE

The scientific literature on the effects of meditation amounts to a hodgepodge of bad, good, and remarkable results in a mix of questionable methodologies, so-so designs, and gold-standard studies. So I asked the dean of contemplative neuroscience, Wisconsin’s Richard Davidson, to sort through it all and summarize the clear benefits for attention of mindfulness practice. He immediately ticked off two big ones.

“Mindfulness,” he said, “boosts the classic attention network in the brain’s fronto-parietal system that works together to allocate attention. These circuits are fundamental in the basic movement of attention: disengaging your focus from one thing, moving it to another, and staying with that new object of attention.”

Another key improvement is in selective attention, inhibiting the pull of distractors. This lets us focus on what’s important rather than be distracted by what’s going on around us—you can keep your focus on the meaning of these words instead of having it pulled away by, say, checking this endnote.9This is the essence of cognitive control.

Though so far there are just a few well-designed studies of mindfulness in children, “[i]n adults there seems to be strong data on mindfulness and attention networks,” according to Mark Greenberg, professor of human development at Pennsylvania State University.10Greenberg, who himself is leading studies of mindfulness in young people, is cautious but optimistic.11

One of the bigger benefits for students is in understanding. Wandering minds punch holes in comprehension. The antidote for mind wandering is meta-awareness, attention to attention itself, as in the ability tonotice that you are not noticingwhat you should, and correcting your focus. Mindfulness makes this crucial attention muscle stronger.12

Then there are the well-established relaxation effects, such as the calm emanating from a breathing buddies classroom. This physiological impact suggests a downshift in the set point for arousal in the vagus nerve circuitry, the key to staying calm under stress and recovering quickly from upsets. The vagus nerve manages a host of physiological functions, most notably heart rate—and so the quickness of recovery from stress.13

Higher vagal tone, which can result from mindfulness and other meditations, leads to greater flexibility in many ways.14People are better able to manage both their attention and their emotions. In the social realm they can more easily create positive relationships and have effective interactions.

Beyond such benefits, mindfulness meditators show symptom lessening in a remarkable range of physiological disorders, from sheer jitters to hypertension and chronic pain. “Some of the biggest effects found with mindfulness are biological,” says Davidson, adding, “It’s surprising for an exercise that trains attention.”

Jon Kabat-Zinn founded the Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction program, which triggered a worldwide wave of mindfulness deployed in thousands of hospitals and clinics, and in society at large, from prisons to leadership development. He tells me, “Our patients typically come in because they’re overwhelmed by stress or pain. But there’s something about paying attention to your own inner states, and seeing what needs to change in your life. People on their own stop smoking or change the way they eat and start losing weight, though as a rule we never say anything directly about these.”

Almost any variety of meditation, in essence, retrains our habits of attention—particularly the routine default to a wandering mind.15When three kinds of meditation were tested—concentration, generating loving-kindness, and open awareness—each technique quieted the areas for mind wandering.

So while gaming offers one promising venue for enhancing cognitive skills, mindfulness and similar attention-training methods present an alternative or complement. The two training approaches may be merging, as in the breathing gameTenacity. When I spoke to Davidson he told me, “We’re taking what we can learn from meditation research and adapting it for games, so the benefits can spread more widely. Our research on attention and calming informs the games’ design.”

Still, methods like mindfulness seem to offer an “organic” way to teach focusing skills without the risks that endless hours of gaming pose for de-skilling kids in the social realm.16Indeed, mindfulness seems to prime brain circuitry that makes us engage the world more, not withdraw.17Whether a well-designed game can do the same for the brain’s social circuitry remains to be seen.18

Psychiatrist Daniel Siegel of the University of California, Los Angeles, describes the wiring that links attuning to ourselves and attuning to others as a “resonance circuit” that mindfulness practice strengthens.19A well-connected life, Dr. Siegel argues, begins with the circuitry for mindfulness in the brain’s prefrontal executive centers, which do double duty: they are also at play when we attune in rapport.

Mindfulness strengthens connections between the prefrontal executive zones and the amygdala, particularly the circuits that can say “no” to impulse—a vital skill for navigating through life (as we saw in part 2).20

Enhanced executive function widens the gap between impulse and action, in part by building meta-awareness, the capacity to observe our mental processes rather than just be swept away by them. This creates decision points we did not have before: we can squelch troublesome impulses that we usually would act on.

MINDFULNESS AT WORK

Google is a citadel of the high IQ. I had heard that no applicants get a job interview there unless they can show test scores putting them in the top 1 percent of intellect. So when I gave a talk on the emotional kind of intelligence at Google some years ago, I was surprised to find an overflow crowd in one of the biggest meeting rooms at the Googleplex, with monitors broadcasting my talk to people in overflow rooms. That enthusiasm was later channeled into a mindfulness-based emotional intelligence course at Google University called Search Inside Yourself.

To create that course, Google’s employee No. 107, Chade-Meng Tan, teamed with my old friend Mirabai Bush, founder of the Center for Contemplative Mind in Society, to design an experience that enhances self-awareness—for example, by using a body scan meditation to tune in to feelings. An inner compass helps greatly at Google, where many business innovations have come from the company’s policy of giving its employees one free day a week to pursue their own pet projects. But Meng, as he’s known widely, has a larger vision: to make the course available far beyond Google, particularly to leaders.21

Then there’s the newly formed Institute for Mindful Leadership, which is located in Minneapolis and which has trained leaders from Target, Cargill, Honeywell Aerospace, and a host of other companies around the world. Another mecca has been Center for Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction at the University of Massachusetts Medical School, in Worcester; it has a training center for executives. Miraval, a posh resort in Arizona, has offered an annual CEO mindfulness retreat for several years, taught by Jon Kabat-Zinn, whose work at the center he founded unleashed the mindfulness movement.

Mindfulness programs have been deployed by groups as diverse as the chaplaincy unit of the U.S. Army, Yale Law School, and General Mills, where more than three hundred executives are applying mindful leadership methods.

What difference does it make? At a biotech firm where the Google Search Inside Yourself program was delivered, early data suggests mindfulness boosts both self-awareness and empathy. Those who took part in the training showed increases in specific mindfulness skills, including a greater ability to observe and describe their own experience, and to act with awareness, said Philippe Goldin, a psychologist at Stanford, who assessed the program’s effects.

“The participants said they had become better able to use self-regulation strategies—like redirecting their attention to less upsetting aspects of loaded situations—in the heat of the moment when their attention was being hijacked,” Goldin added. “They’re building the muscle of attention deployment so they can choose what aspect of experience to attend to. It’s a volitional redirection of attention. And they’re more able to use these attention skills when they are really needed.

“We also found a boost in empathic concern for others, and being able to listen better,” Goldin said. “One is an attitude, the other the actual skill, the muscle. These are vitally important in the workplace.”

One division head at General Mills came to the mindfulness course there to get a breather from feeling overwhelmed. She brought a taste of mindfulness back to work, where she asked her direct reports to take a reflective pause before asking her to a meeting. The aim of that pause was to question the need for the division head to spend her time at that meeting in the first place.

The result: What had been a nine-to-five schedule of back-to-back meetings opened up into three hours daily for her own priorities.

These questions are designed to provoke a person to reflect on his or her level of mindfulness:22

•   Do you have trouble remembering what someone has just told you during a conversation?

•   Have no memory of your morning commute?

•   Not taste your food while eating?

•   Pay more attention to your iPod than the person you’re with?

•   Are you skimming this book?

The more “yes” answers, the greater the likelihood you zone out rather than tune in. Mindfulness gives us a greater level of choice in focus.

Mindlessness, in the form of mind wandering, may be the single biggest waster of attention in the workplace. Focus on our experience in the here and now—like the task at hand, the conversation we’re having, or the building of consensus in a meeting—demands that we tune down the all-about-myself murmurs of mind stuff irrelevant to what’s going on right now.23

Mindfulness develops our capacity to observe our moment-to-moment experience in an impartial, nonreactive manner. We practice letting go of thoughts about any one thing and open our focus to whatever comes to mind in the stream of awareness, without getting lost in a torrent of thoughts about any one thing. This training generalizes, so that in those moments at work when we need to pay attention tothisand drop our stream of thought aboutthat, we can let go of the one and focus on the other.

Mindfulness training decreases activity in me-circuitry centering on the medial prefrontal cortex—and the less self-talk, the more we can experience in the moment.24The longer people have been mindfulness practitioners, the more their brain can decouple the two kinds of self-awareness and activate circuits that foster a here-and-now presence for the task at hand free of the mind’s “me” chatter.25

Building executive control helps especially for those of us for whom every setback, hurt, or disappointment creates endless cascades of rumination. Mindfulness lets us break the stream of thoughts that might otherwise lead to wallowing in misery, by changing our relationship to thought itself. Instead of being swept away by that stream we can pause and see thatthese are just thoughts—and choose whether or not to act on them.

In short, mindfulness practice strengthens focus, particularly executive control, working memory capacity, and the ability to sustain attention. Some of these benefits can be seen with as little as twenty minutes of practice for just four days (though the longer the training, the more sustained the effects).26

Then there’s multitasking, the bane of efficiency. “Multitasking” really means switching what’s filling the capacity of working memory—and routine disruptions from a given focus at work can mean minutes lost to the original task. It can take ten or fifteen minutes to regain full focus.

When human resources professionals were trained in mindfulness, then tested on a simulation of their daily frenzy—scheduling meetings for conference attendees, locating available meeting rooms, proposing a meeting agenda, and so on, while receiving random phone calls, texts, and emails telling them what’s possible—the mindfulness training improved their concentration noticeably. What’s more, they stayed on task longer and more efficiently.27

I was at a meeting in the office of More Than Sound (a production company run by one of my sons) when our focus meandered: there were parallel conversations going on, and some people discreetly checked their email. That disintegration of our shared focus was a moment familiar from hundreds of other meetings—a signal that the group’s efficiency was tanking. But suddenly one of the people there said, “Time for some mindful moments,” got up, and rang a small gong.

We all sat there together in silence for a few minutes until the gong rang again, and then resumed our meeting—but with renewed energy. A remarkable moment for me, but not at More Than Sound, where, it seems, the team assembles at irregular intervals to share some minutes of mindfulness, signaled by that ringing gong. The group pause, they say, clears their heads and gives them a new burst of energized focus.

It’s no surprise this small publisher recognizes the value of mindfulness; when I dropped by it had just releasedMindfulness at Work, an audio instruction by Mirabai Bush, the woman who introduced mindfulness to Google.

SEEING THE BIGGER PICTURE

Business leaders are increasingly pressured by the acceleration of complexity in the systems they need to navigate: there’s the globalization of markets, suppliers, and organizations; the hyperspeed of evolving information technologies; impending ecological dangers; products coming to market and becoming obsolete faster. It can make your head spin.

“Most leaders just don’t pause,” a seasoned leadership coach tells me. “But you need the time to reflect.”

His boss, the head of a mega-sized investment management firm, put it this way: “If I don’t protect that kind of time, I really get thrown off.”

Former Medtronic CEO Bill George agrees. “Today’s leaders are besieged. They’re scheduled every fifteen minutes throughout the day, with thousands of interruptions and distractions. You need to find some quiet time in your day just to reflect.”

Setting aside some regular reflective time in the daily or weekly schedule might help us get beyond the firefight-of-the-day mentality, to take stock and look ahead. Very diverse thinkers, from Congressman Tim Ryan to Columbia University economist Jeffrey D. Sachs, are calling for mindfulness as a way to help leaders see the bigger picture.28They propose we need not just mindful leaders, but a mindful society, one where we bring a triple focus: to our own well-being, that of others, and the operations of the broader systems that shape our lives.

Mindfulness of self, Sachs argues, would include a more accurate reading of what makes us truly happy. Global economic data shows that once a country reaches a modest level of income—enough to meet basic needs—there is zero connection between happiness and wealth. Intangibles like warm connections with people we love and meaningful activities make people far happier than say, shopping or work.

But we can be poor judges of what will make us feel good. Sachs argues that if we are more mindful of how we use our money we will be less likely to fall prey to seductive ads for products that will not make us any happier. Mindfulness would lead us to more modest material desires and to spend more time and energy fulfilling our deeper, more satisfying needs for meaning and connection.

Mindfulness of others at the societal level, Sachs says, means paying attention to the suffering of the poor and to the social safety net, which is badly fraying in the United States and many other advanced economies. He argues that while now the poor are helped just enough to barely survive, that simply creates intergenerational poverty. What’s needed is a one-generation boost in education and health for the poorest children so they can go through life with higher levels of skills and so not need the same kind of help their families did.

To that end I’d add programs, like mindfulness, that boost the brain’s executive control. In Dunedin the kids who happened to improve their self-control over the course of childhood derived the same earnings and health benefits for life success as those who always were adept in delaying gratification. But those impulse control upgrades were due to happenstance, not achieved by plan. Wouldn’t it make sense to teach these skills to every child?

Then there’s awareness of systems at the global level, like the human impact on the planet. Solving systems-level problems takes systems focus. Mindfulness of the future means taking into account the long-term consequences of our own actions for our children’s generation and their children’s, and beyond.