PART VI

THE WELL-FOCUSED LEADER

18

HOW LEADERS DIRECT ATTENTION

Death by PowerPoint” refers to those endless, meandering presentations that this software tool seems to encourage. Those presentations can be painful when they reflect a lack of focused thinking, and a poor sense of what matters. One sign of the ability to pinpoint what’s salient is how someone answers the simple question, What’s your main point?

When a meeting is coming up, I hear, Steve Balmer, CEO at Microsoft (birthplace of the dread PowerPoint), bans such presentations. Instead he asks to see the material beforehand so that when he’s face-to-face he can cut to the chase and ask the questions that matter most right off the bat, rather than taking a long, winding road to get there. As he says, “It gives us greater focus.”1

Directing attention toward where it needs to go is a primal task of leadership. Talent here lies in the ability to shift attention to the right place at the right time, sensing trends and emerging realities and seizing opportunities. But it’s not just the focus of a single strategic decision-maker that makes or breaks a company: it’s the entire array of attention bandwidth and dexterity among everyone.2

Sheer numbers of people make an organization’s cumulative attention far more distributable than an individual’s, with a division of labor in who pays attention to what. This multiple focus powers an organization’s attention capacity for reading and responding to complex systems.

Attention in organizations, as with individuals, has a limited capacity. Organizations, too, have to choose where to allocate attention, focusing on this while ignoring that. An organization’s core functions—finance, marketing, human resources, and the like—describe how a particular group focuses.

Signs of what might be called organizational “attention deficit disorder” include making flawed decisions because of missing data, no time for reflection, trouble getting attention in the marketplace, and inability to focus when and where it matters.

Take getting noticed in the marketplace, where customers’ focus is hard currency. The bar for attracting attention rises continually; what was dazzling last month seems boring today. While one strategy for grabbing eyeballs tweaks our bottom-up systems with surprising, attention-compelling tech effects, there’s been a renaissance in an older method: telling a good story.3Stories do more than grab our attention: they keep it. This is a lesson not lost in the “attention industries” like media, TV, film, music, and advertising—all of which play a zero-sum game for our attention, where one’s victory is the other’s loss.

Attention tends to focus on what has meaning—what matters. The story a leader tells can imbue a particular focus with such resonance, and so implies a choice for the others on where to put their attention and energy.4

Leadership itself hinges on effectively capturing and directing the collective attention. Leading attention requires these elements: first, focusing your own attention, then attracting and directing attention from others, and getting and keeping the attention of employees and peers, of customers or clients.

A well-focused leader can balance an inner focus on the climate and culture with an “other focus” on the competitive landscape, and an outer focus on the larger realities that shape the environment the outfit operates in.

A leader’s field of attention—that is, the particular issues and goals she focuses on—guides the attention of those who follow her, whether or not the leader explicitly articulates it. People make their choices about where to focus based on their perception of what matters to leaders. This ripple effect gives leaders an extra load of responsibility: they are guiding not just their own attention but, to a large extent, everyone else’s.5

Take, as a case in point, strategy. An organization’s strategy represents thedesiredpattern of organizational attention, what every unit should share a degree of focus on, each in its particular way.6A given strategy makes choices about what to ignore and what matters: Market share or profit? Current competitors or potential ones? Which new technologies? When leaders choose strategy, they are guiding attention.

WHERE DOES STRATEGY COME FROM?

Kobun Chino, a master ofkyudo, Zen archery, was once invited to demonstrate his skills at Esalen Institute, the famed adult learning center in Big Sur, California, just down the road from the San Francisco Zen Center’s Tassajara retreat.

Comes the day and someone sets up an archery target on a grassy knoll atop a tall cliff at the edge of the Pacific Ocean. Chino positions himself a good distance away from the target, places his feet in the traditional archer’s stance, straightens his back, very slowly draws the bow, waits a while, and then lets the arrow fly.

The arrow zooms far over the target, arcs against the open sky, and falls into the Pacific Ocean far below. Everyone watching is aghast.

Then Kobun Chino shouts with glee, “Bull’s-eye!”

“Genius,” Arthur Schopenhauer observed, “hits the target others do not see.”

Kobun Chino was the Zen teacher of Apple Computer’s legendary CEO, the late Steve Jobs. Among unseen targets Jobs hit was the then-radical concept of a computer that anyone could understand and use with ease, not just geeks—an idea that had somehow eluded every computer company of the day. After creating the first Apple desktop he and his team transferred that user-friendly vision to the iPod, iPhone, and iPad, each a handy product that we hadn’t realized we needed—or imagined in the first place—until we saw it.

When Steve Jobs returned to Apple in 1997, after having been ousted in 1984, he found a company with a sea of products—computers, peripheral products for computers, twelve different types of Macintosh. The company was floundering. His strategy was simple: focus.

Instead of dozens of products, Apple would concentrate on just four: one computer and one laptop each for two markets, consumer and professional. Just as in his Zen practice, where recognizing you’ve become distracted helps you concentrate, he saw that “[deciding whatnotto do is as important as deciding what to do.”7

Jobs was relentless in filtering out what he considered irrelevancies, both personally and in his professionl life. But he knew that in order to simplify effectively you need to understand the complexity that you are reducing. A single decision to simplify, like Jobs’s dictum that Apple products allow a user to do anything in three clicks or less, demanded a deep understanding of the function of the commands and buttons being given up, and finding elegant alternatives.

More than a century before Apple existed, another radical vision made the Singer sewing machine an enormous commercial success worldwide. The disruptive assumption was that housewives could operate a mechanical contraption—a radical thought in the nineteenth century, long before women in the United States won the right to vote. And Singer made it easy for women to buy the machines by extending them credit, another innovative move.

In 1876 alone, Singer sold 262,316 machines, an enormous number in those days. One of its founders built the Dakota, a landmark Manhattan apartment building where luminaries like Yoko Ono and John Lennon have lived. In 1908, the brand-new forty-seven-story company headquarters, the Singer building, was the world’s tallest.

My mother, who was born in 1910 (and passed away two months short of her hundredth birthday), owned a Singer from her teen years. I can remember as a child going with her to the local pattern store; women of her era routinely made many of their own and their family’s clothes. But by the time I arrived—her late-in-life third child—she bought my clothes.

Culture shifts like housewives taking to sewing machines—and then later buying their family ready-made clothes, which then were increasingly made by cheap labor abroad—constantly open possibilities: new groups of customers, ways to buy, evolving needs, technologies, distribution channels, or information systems. Every advance opens doors to a host of potential winning strategies.

Apple and Singer left fresh footprints in the snow that their competitors followed in a desperate game of catching up. Today a mini-industry of consultants stands ready to guide companies through a standard playbook of strategic choices. But those off-the-shelf strategies fine-tune an organization’s tactics—they don’t change the game.

The original meaning ofstrategywas from the battlefield; it meant “the art of the leader”—back then, generals. Strategy was how you deployed your resources; tactics were how battles were fought. Today, leaders need to generate strategies that make sense in whatever larger systems they operate in—a task for outer focus.

A new strategy means reorienting from what’s now business as usual to a fresh focus. Coming up with a radically innovative strategy demands perceiving a novel position, one your competitors do not see. Winning tactics are available to everyone, yet are overlooked by all but a few.

Armies of consultants offer elaborate analytic tools for fine-tuning a strategy. But they stop cold when it comes to answering the big question: Where does a winning strategy come from in the first place? A classic article on strategy makes this offhand remark and leaves it at that: to find winning strategies “requires creativity and insight.”8

Those two ingredients take both inner and outer focus. When Marc Benioff, founder and first CEO of Salesforce, realized the potential for cloud computing, he was monitoring the evolution of a system-changing technology—an outer focus—along with his own gut sense of how a company offering such services would do. Salesforce uses the cloud to help companies manage their customer relationships, and it staked out an early position in this competitive space.

The best leaders have systems awareness, helping them answer the constant query, Where should we head and how? The self-mastery and social skills built on self and other focus combine to build the emotional intelligence that drives the human engine needed to get there. A leader needs to check a potential strategic choice against everything she knows. And once the strategic choice gets made, the leader needs to communicate it with passion and skill, drawing on cognitive and emotional empathy. But those personal skills alone will founder if leaders lack strategic wisdom.

“If you think in a systems way,” says Larry Brilliant, “that drives how you deal with values, vision, mission, strategy, goals, tactics, deliverables, evaluation, and the feedback loop that restarts the whole process.”

THE TELLING DETAIL ON THE HORIZON

By the mid-2000s, the BlackBerry had become the darling of corporate IT. Companies loved that the system ran on its own closed network, reliable, fast, and secure. They handed BlackBerrys out to employees by the thousands, and the wordcrackberry(for the addiction of users) entered the lexicon. The maker rose to market dominance on four key strengths: ease of typing, excellent security, long battery life, and wireless data compression.

For a time the BlackBerry was a winning technology, changing the rules of the game by displacing competitors (in this case, some functions of PCs and laptops, and, entirely, that era’s mobile phones). But even as BlackBerrys dominated the corporate market and were fast becoming a consumer fad, the world was changing. The iPhone ushered in an epoch where more and more workers bought their own brands of smartphones—not necessarily BlackBerrys—and companies adapted by letting employees bring their devices to the company network. Suddenly BlackBerrys’ lock on the corporate market evaporated as they had to compete with everyone else.

Research in Motion (RIM), the Canadian-based maker of the BlackBerry, was slow to catch up. When RIM introduced a touchscreen, for example, it was no match for those long on the market. BlackBerry’s closed network, once an asset, became a liability in a world where phones themselves—the iPhone, and those based on the Android operating system—had become platforms for their own worlds of apps.

RIM was run by co-CEOs who were both engineers, and the brand’s initial success was built on superior engineering. After these co-CEOs were forced out by their board, RIM announced it would once again focus on companies as its prime market, even though most of its growth had come on the consumer side.

As Thorsten Heins, the new CEO, put it, RIM had missed major paradigm shifts in its ecological niche. It had ignored the move in the United States to fourth-generation (4G) wireless networks, failing to build devices for 4G even as its competitors seized that market. It underestimated how popular the iPhone’s touchscreen would become, and stuck to the keyboard.

“If you have a great touch interface, people are actually willing to sacrifice battery life,” Heins says. “We thought that wouldn’t happen. Same thing with security,” as companies changed their standards to allow workers to join corporate networks with their own smartphones.9

While once the BlackBerry brand had seemed revolutionary, now, as one analyst put it, they “seemed clueless about what customers wanted.”10

Though it continued to lead in markets like Indonesia, just five years after the BlackBerry dominated the American market RIM had lost 75 percent of its market value. As I write this, RIM has announced a last-ditch attempt to recoup market share with a new phone. But RIM may have entered a chapter in a company’s life that could be fatal—a “valley of death.”

That phrase comes from Andrew Grove, the legendary founding CEO of Intel, who recounts a near-death moment in his company’s history. In its early years Intel made silicon chips for what was then the fledgling computer industry. As Grove tells it, top managers were oblivious to messages coming from their own sales force telling them that customers were shifting in droves to cheaper chips being made in Japan.

If Intel had not happened to have a side business in microprocessors—which became the ubiquitous “Intel Inside” in the heyday of laptops—the company would have died. But back then, Grove admits, Intel suffered from a “strategic dissonance,” in shifting from making memory chips—its first business success—to designing microprocessors.

The name of Grove’s book—Only the Paranoid Survive—tacitly nods to the necessity of vigilance, scanning for the telling detail on the horizon. This holds true in particular for the tech sector, where super-short product cycles (compared with, say, refrigerators) make the pace of innovation brutal.

The rapid-fire cycle of product innovations in the tech sector makes it a handy source of case studies (somewhat akin to the role that frenetically procreating, short-lived fruit flies play in genetics). In gaming, Nintendo’s remote controller Wii grabbed the market from Sony’s PlayStation 2; Google blew away Yahoo’s supremacy as the favored portal to the Web. Microsoft, which at one point had a 42 percent market share for mobile phone operating systems, saw iPhone earnings mushroom to dwarf the total revenue of Microsoft. Innovations rearrange our sense of what’s possible.

When Apple launched the iPod, it took Microsoft four or five years to release Zune, its version of a portable digital media player—and another six years to kill the failed product.11Microsoft’s fixation on its cash cow, the Windows software family, analysts say, accounts for the company failing to match Apple’s march to market supremacy through the iPod, iPhone, and iPad.

As Clay Shirky observes of the failure to disengage focus from comfort zones, “First the people running the old system don’t notice the change. When they do, they assume it’s minor. Then it’s a niche, then a fad. And by the time they understand that the world has actually changed, they’ve squandered most of the time they had to adapt.”12

THINK DIFFERENT

RIM during its difficult days offers a textbook example of organizational rigidity, where a company that thrives by being the first to market a new technological twist falls behind successive tech waves because its focus fixates on the old new thing, not the next. An organization that focuses inwardly may execute superbly. But if it has not attuned to the larger world in which it operates, that execution may end up in the service of a failed strategy.

Any business school course on strategy will tell you about two approaches: exploitation and exploration. Some people—and some businesses like RIM—succeed through a strategy of exploitation, where they refine and learn how to improve an existing capacity, technology, or business model. Others find their road to success through exploration, by experimenting with innovative alternatives to what they do now.

Companies with a winning strategy tend to refine their current operations and offerings, not explore radical shifts in what they offer. A mental balancing act—exploring the new while exploiting what’s working—does not come naturally. But those companies that can both exploit and explore—as Samsung has done with smartphones—are “ambidextrous”: they separate each strategy into units, with very different ways of operating and cultures. At the same time they have a tight-knit team of senior leaders who keep an eye on the balance of inner, outer, and other focus.13

What works at the organizational level parallels the individual mind. The mind’s executive, the arbiter of where our focus goes, manages both the concentration that exploitation requires and the open focus that exploration demands.

Exploration means we disengage from a current focus to search for new possibilities, and allows flexibility, discovery, and innovation. Exploitation takes sustained focus on what you’re already doing, so you can refine efficiencies and improve performance.

Those who exploit can find a safer path to profits, while those who explore can potentially find a far greater success in the next new thing—though the risks of failure are greater, and the horizon of payback is further away. Exploitation is the tortoise, exploration the hare.

The tension between these two operates in every decision-maker’s mind. Do you stay with the battery technology your company has been getting better and better at making pay? Or do you pursue, say, R&D on a new energy storage technique that could make batteries obsolete (or not)? These are the hands-on strategic decisions that make or break a company, as Stanford’s strategy theory maven, James March, has been arguing for years.14

The best decision-makers are ambidextrous in their balance of the two, knowing when to switch from one to the other. They can lead switch-hitting organizations, which are, for instance, good at seeking growth by simultaneously innovating and containing costs—two very different operations. Kodak was superb at analog photography but stumbled in the new competitive reality of digital cameras.

Danger here abounds during a business downturn, when companies understandably focus on surviving and meeting their numbers by cutting costs—but often at the expense of caring for their people or keeping up with how the world has changed. Being in survival mode narrows our focus.

But prospering is no guarantee of ambidexterity, either. That switch can be hardest for those caught in what Intel’s Grove calls the “success trap.” He observes that every company will face a point when it will have to change dramatically to survive, let alone raise its performance. “Miss the moment,” he warns, “and you start to decline.”

For too long, Grove says, Intel still had its best development people working on memory chips—even as the company’s survival had begun to depend on microprocessors, which over the next decade were to become a huge growth engine. Intel was having trouble unsticking from exploitation to exploration.

Apple’s slogan “Think different” dictates a switch to exploration. Moving into new territory rather than hunkering down to increase efficiency is more than a contrast in stances—at the level of the brain the two represent entirely different mental functions and neural mechanisms. Attention control holds the key for decision-makers needing to make the switch.

Brain scans of sixty-three seasoned business decision-makers as they pursued either exploitive or exploratory strategies in a simulation game—or switched between the two—revealed the specific circuitry underlying each kind of focus.15Exploitation was accompanied by activity in the brain’s circuitry for anticipation and for reward—it feels good to coast along in a profitable, familiar routine. But exploration mobilized activity in the brain’s executive centers and those for controlling attention; searching for alternatives to a current strategy, it seems, demands intentional focus.

The first movement to new territory entails disengaging from pleasing routine and fighting the inertia of ruts; this small act of attention demands what neuroscience calls “cognitive effort.” That effortful dab of executive control frees attention to roam widely and pursue fresh paths.

What keeps people from making this small neural effort? For one, mental overload, stress, and sleep deprivation (not to mention drinking) deplete the executive circuitry needed to make such a cognitive switch, keeping us in our mental ruts. And the stress of overload, sleeplessness, and turning to substances that calm you down are all too prevalent among those in high-demand jobs.

19

THE LEADER’S TRIPLE FOCUS

When he was just eleven years old Steve Tuttleman started reading theWall Street Journalwith his grandfather, a habit that some four decades later has been gravitating toward his tablet. Each day he checks over twenty websites, in addition to news and opinion feeds stripped by an RSS reader. Starting the moment he wakes up and then a half dozen times over the course of the day he checks breaking news, mainly on sites of theNew York Times, theWall Street Journal, and Google News. A web app organizes contents of the twenty-six magazines he currently subscribes to so that he can flag relevant articles to read later. Says Tuttleman, “If the piece is of high importance, or takes some study, or needs to be saved for reference, then I come back to it when I can devote myself.”

Then there are the sector-specific publications, each tied to a particular business interest.National Restaurant Newsrelates to a chain of Dunkin’ Donuts franchises he holds a stake in;Bowler’s Journalkeeps him up to speed for managing Ebonite, a manufacturing company he owns that sells balls and the like for bowlers. TheJournal of Practical Estate Planning, along with a half dozen similar publications, helps keep him abreast of what might be relevant to his role as a director of Hirtle Callaghan, which manages assets for philanthropies, universities, and high-net-worth individuals. AndPrivate Equity Investorhelps track conditions for the business he leads as president of Blue 9 Capital.

“It’s a big scan, that’s for sure,” Tuttleman tells me. “Sometimes I feel it takes too much time. But I’m always making connections with what I read. It gives me a foundation for what I do.”

When Tuttleman was approached in 2004 to invest in a retail chain called Five Below, he says, “They shared projections for a model store, and the numbers were right for costs and margins.”

But Tuttleman went beyond the numbers, visiting one of the chain’s six stores, where he checked his inner signals against how others were reacting. “They offered an appealing selection of goods, one with a point of view. Their target customers are twelve to fifteen, and in the stores you mostly see moms with their kids. But mainly I saw people liked the store, andIliked the store.”

Over the next several years Tuttleman put more money into Five Below. What had been a six-store chain in 2004 had grown to 250 by the end of 2012, and the company had gone through a successful IPO. The company went public in the wake of the Facebook IPO debacle, but it did well nonetheless.

“People bring investment opportunities to me all the time,” says Tuttleman. “They give me a ‘book’ that details the numbers for a company that’s on the market. But I’ve got to weigh that in a broader context of what’s happening in society, the culture, and the economy. I’m always scanning for what’s happening in the broader world; you need a bigger field of view.”

Way back in 1989 Tuttleman bought stock in Starbucks, Microsoft, Home Depot, and Wal-Mart. He still owns the same stocks. Why did he buy them? “I bought whatIliked,” he explains. “I go by my gut.”

When we make a decision like that, subcortical systems operate outside conscious awareness, gathering the decision rules that guide us and store our life wisdom—and deliver their opinion as a felt sense. That subtle stirring—This feels right—sets our direction even before we can put that decision into words.

The most successful entrepreneurs gather data that might be relevant to a key decision far more widely—and from a larger variety of sources—than most people would think relevant. But they also realize that when facing a major decision, gut feelings are data, too.

The subcortical circuits that know such gut truths before we have words for them include the amygdala and the insula. A scholarly review of gut intuitions concludes that using feelings as information is a “generally sensible judgmental strategy,” rather than a perennial source of error, as the hyperrational might argue.1Tuning in to our feelings as a source of information taps into a vast amount of decision rules that the mind gathers unconsciously.

Tuttleman’s tutorial for his gut sense very likely has roots in those early years going over theWall Street Journalwith his grandfather, who as a Russian immigrant had gotten a job in a grocery store and ended up buying the store, then buying the distributor who supplied the store. Selling that company, he became a stock market investor.

Like his father and grandfather before him, says Tuttleman, “I always knew I would be an investor. Our dinner table conversation was always about business as I grew up. I’ve been in this business for almost thirty years, and always had a portfolio of companies. Every company has its own issues that I’m constantly dealing with. I’m still building that inner database.”

The sweet spot for smart decisions, then, comes not just from being a domain expert, but also from having high self-awareness. If you know yourself as well as your business, then you can be shrewder in interpreting the facts (while, hopefully, safeguarding against the inner distortions that can blur your lens).2

Otherwise we’re left with cold rationality as embodied, for instance, in decision trees (applications of what’s known as “expected utility theory”), where we weight and compute the pros and cons of all relevant factors. One problem: life rarely arranges itself so neatly. Another: our bottom-up mind harbors crucial information that our top-down brain can’t access directly, let alone put into that decision tree. What looks good on paper may not be so great in actuality: say, unregulated markets for subprime derivatives or invading Iraq.

“The most successful leaders are constantly seeking out new information,” says Ruth Malloy, global director of Hay Group’s leadership and talent practice. “They want to understand the territory they operate in. They need to be alert to new trends, and to spot emerging patterns that might matter to them.”

When we say a leader has “focus” we typically are referring to one-pointedness on business results, or on a particular strategy. But is such single-pointedness enough? What about the rest of the repertoire of attention?

Tuttleman’s business choices integrate the numbers with inputs from a wide outer scan, attuning to his gut reactions, and reading how other people feel. There’s a strong case that leaders need the full range of inner, other, and outer focus to excel—and that a weakness in any one of them can throw a leader off balance.

LEADERS WHO INSPIRE

Consider two leaders. Leader #1 works as a high-level executive in a construction engineering firm. During Arizona’s housing boom in the early 2000s (and well before the resulting crash), he switched jobs over and over, each time getting a higher-level position. His agility in climbing the corporate ladder, though, was not matched by his abilities as an inspiring leader. When asked to come up with a vision statement for his company to guide it into the future, he fumbled the task. “Being better than our competition” was the best he could do.

Leader #2 directed a nonprofit corporation that offered health and social services to Hispanic communities in the Southwest. His vision statement flowed freely, and focused squarely on greater goals: “to create a good environment for this community, which has been nurturing our company all these years, to make it a profit-sharing endeavor . . . and to benefit from our products.” His vision was positive and embraced an expanded view of stakeholders.

In the following weeks, employees who worked directly for each leader were asked in confidence to evaluate how inspiring they found their boss. Leader #1 had one of the lowest ratings among the fifty leaders evaluated; leader #2 was among the highest.

More intriguingly, each leader had been assessed on a brain measure of “coherence,” the degree to which circuits within a region interconnect and coordinate their activity. The specific region was in the prefrontal area of the right side of the brain, in a zone active in integrating thought and emotion, as well as in understanding the thoughts and emotions of others. The inspiring leaders showed a high level of coherence in this key area for inner and other awareness, the dull leaders very little.3

Leaders who inspire can articulate shared values that resonate with and motivate the group. These are the leaders people love to work with, who surface the vision that moves everyone. But to speak from the heart, to the heart, a leader must first know her values. That takes self-awareness.

Inspiring leadership demands attuning both to an inner emotional reality and to that of those we seek to inspire. These are elements of emotional intelligence, which I’ve had to rethink a bit in light of our new understanding of focus.

Attention gets talked about only indirectly in the emotional intelligence world: as “self-awareness,” which is the basis of self-management; and as “empathy,” the foundation for relationship effectiveness. Yet awareness of our self and of others, and its application in managing our inner world and our relationships, is the essence of emotional intelligence.

Acts of attention are woven throughout the very fabric of emotional intelligence because at the level of brain architecture the dividing line between emotion and attention blurs. The neural circuits for attention and those for feelings overlap in many ways, sharing neural pathways or interacting.

Because the brain interweaves its circuits for attention and for emotional intelligence, it turns out that some of this shared neural circuitry also sets these skills apart from the more academic variety, as measured by IQ.4That means a leader can be very smart but not necessarily have the focusing skills that come with emotional intelligence.

Take empathy. The common cold of leadership is poor listening. Here’s how one CEO candidly assessed his own trouble with this form of empathy: “My brain races too much, so even if I’ve listened to everything somebody said, unless you show that you’ve digested it, people don’t think they are being well heard. Sometimes you really don’t hear because you’re racing. And so, if you really want to get the best out of people, you have to really hear them and they have to feel like they’ve been really heard. So I’ve got to learn to slow down and improve in that dimension, both to make me better and to make the people around me better.”5

A London-based executive coach tells me, “When I give people their feedback from others, very often it says an executive does not listen attentively. When I coach them on getting better at paying attention to people I often hear an executive say, I can do this.”

I point out, “Youcan, but the question is howoftenyou do this.” We pay careful attention in moments that matter most to us. But amid the din and distraction of work life, poor listening has become epidemic.

Still, attentive listening pays dividends. One CEO told me about a time when his company was locked in a struggle with a state agency over the purchase of a large tract of forest land. Rather than just leaving the matter to lawyers, the CEO made an appointment with the head of the agency.

At the meeting, the agency head launched a tirade of complaints about the CEO’s company, and how the land needed to be conserved rather than developed. The CEO simply listened attentively for fifteen minutes. By then, he saw, his company’s needs and those of the agency could be made compatible. He proposed a compromise where the company would develop only a small portion of the tract, and put the rest into a conservation trust for perpetual protection.

The meeting ended with the two shaking hands on a deal.

BLINDED BY THE PRIZE

She was a partner at a huge law firm who drove her team crazy. She micromanaged, constantly second-guessing them, rewriting reports that didn’t meet her standards even though they were perfectly fine. She could always find something to criticize, but nothing to praise. Her steadfast focus on the negative demoralized her team—a star member quit and others were looking to move laterally in the firm.

Those who, like that too critical lawyer, have this high-achieving, super-focused style are called “pacesetters,” meaning they like to lead by example, setting a fast pace they assume others will imitate. Pacesetters tend to rely on a “command and coerce” leadership strategy where they simply give orders and expect obedience.

Leaders who display just the pacesetting or command style—or both—but not any others create a toxic climate, one that dispirits those they lead. Such leaders may get short-term results through personal heroics, like going out and getting a deal themselves, but do so at the expense of building their organizations.

“Leadership Run Amok” wasHarvard Business Review’s title for an article about the dark side of pacesetting, written by Scott Spreier and his colleagues at Hay Group. “They’re so focused on the prize,” Spreier told me, “they’re blinded to their impact on the people around them in the room.”

Spreier’s article offered up that hard-driving law partner as a prime example of pacesetting at its worst. Such leaders don’t listen, let alone make decisions by consensus. They don’t spend time getting to know the people they work with day in and out, but relate to them in their one-dimensional roles. They don’t help people develop new strengths or refine their abilities, but simply dismiss their need to learn as a failing. They come off as arrogant and impatient.

And they are spreading. One tracking study finds that the number of people in organizations of all kinds who are overachievers has been climbing steadily among those in leadership positions since the 1990s.6That was a period when economic growth created an atmosphere where raise-the-bar-at-any-cost heroics were lionized. The downsides of this style—for example, lapses in ethics, cutting corners, and running roughshod over people—were too often winked at.

Then came a series of flameouts and burst bubbles, from the collapse of Enron and the dot-com debacle on. This more sober business reality put a spotlight on the underside of pacesetters’ single-minded focus on fiscal results at the expense of other leadership basics. During the financial crisis of 2008 and onward, “many companies promoted strong, top-down leaders, who are good for handling emergencies,” Georg Vielmetter, a consultant in Berlin, told me. “But it changes the heart of the organization. Two years later those same leaders have created a climate where trust and loyalty evaporate.”

The failure here is not in reaching the goal, but in connecting with people. The just-get-it-done mode runs roughshod over human concerns.

Every organization needs people with a keen focus on goals that matter, the talent to continually learn how to do even better, and the ability to tune out distractions. Innovation, productivity, and growth depend on such high-performers.

But only to a point. Ambitious revenue targets or growth goals are not the only gauge of an organization’s health—and if they are achieved at a cost to other basics, the long-term downsides, like losing star employees, can outweigh short-term successes as those costs lead to later failures.

When we’re fixated on a goal, whatever is relevant to that point of focus gets priority. Focus is not just selecting the right thing, but also saying no to the wrong ones. But focus goes too far when it says no to the right things, too. Single-pointed fixation on a goal morphs intooverachievement when the category of “distractions” expands to include other people’s valid concerns, their smart ideas, and their crucial information. Not to mention their morale, loyalty, and motivation.

The roots of this research go back to Harvard professor David McClelland’s studies of how a healthy drive to achieve fuels entrepreneurship. But from the start he noted some high-achieving leaders “are so fixated on finding a shortcut to the goal that they may not be too particular about the means they use to reach it.”7

“Two years ago I got some sobering performance feedback,” confides the CEO of a global office real estate firm. “I was great on business expertise, but lacking when it came to inspirational leadership and empathy. I had thought I was fine, so at first I denied it. Then I reflected and realized I often was empathetic but shut down the moment people were not doing their job well. I get very cool, even mean.

“I realized my biggest fear is of failure. That’s what’s driving me. So when someone on my team disappoints me, that fear kicks in.”

When fear hijacks him that CEO falls back on pacesetting. “If you don’t have self-awareness when you get hooked by the drive to achieve a goal,” says Scott Spreier, who coaches senior leaders, “that’s when you lose empathy and go on autopilot.”

The antidote: realizing the need to listen, motivate, influence, cooperate—an interpersonal skill set that pacesetting leaders are typically not familiar with using. “At their worst, pacesetters lack empathy,” George Kohlrieser, a leadership maven at IMD, a Swiss business school, told me. Kohlrieser teaches leaders from around the world to become “secure base” leaders, whose emotionally supportive and empathic style encourages the people they lead to work at their best.8

“We’re all pacesetters here,” the CEO of one of the world’s largest financial firms admits a bit ruefully. But having a pack of pacesetters need not be damaging to morale: it can work if everyone there has been selected for a high level of talent and drive to succeed—that is, pacesetting.

But as one financial analyst described a bank where a pacesetting culture led to brash treatment of its customers, “I wouldn’t put my money there—but I’d recommend buying the stock.”

MANAGING YOUR IMPACT

In the spring of 2010, in the first weeks after the disastrous BP oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico, as countless sea animals and birds were dying and residents of the Gulf were decrying the catastrophe, BP executives were a textbook example of how not to manage a crisis.

The height of their folly came when BP CEO Tony Hayward infamously declared, “There’s no one who wants this thing over more than I do. I’d like my life back.”

Rather than showing the least concern for the spill’s victims, he seemed annoyed by the inconvenience. He went on to claim the disaster was not BP’s fault, blamed its subcontractors, and took no responsibility.9Widely circulated photos showed him at the peak of the crisis blithely sailing on a yacht, taking a vacation.

As a BP media relations exec put it, “The only time Tony Hayward opened his mouth was to change feet. He didn’t understand the animal that is the media. He didn’t understand the public’s perception.”10

Signe Spencer, coauthor of one of the first books on workplace competence, tells me there is a recently identified capability seen in some high-level leaders—called “managing your impact on others”—by skillful leveraging of their visibility and role to have a positive impact.11

Tony Hayward, blind to his impact on others, let alone to public perception of his company, set off a firestorm of antagonism, including front-page articles demanding to know why he hadn’t been fired yet, and even President Obama declaring he would have fired him. Hayward’s exit from BP was announced the following month.

The disaster has since cost BP up to $40 billion in liabilities, saw four executives charged with negligence, and led to the U.S. government forbidding BP further business—including new oil leases in the Gulf—because of “lack of business integrity.”

Tony Hayward offers a textbook case of the costs of a leader with deficits in focus. “To anticipate how people will react, you have to read people’s reactions to you,” says Spencer. “That takes self-awareness and empathy in a self-reinforcing cycle. You become more aware of how you’re coming across to other people.”

With high self-awareness, she adds, you can more readily develop good self-management. “If you manage yourself better, you will influence better,” Spencer says. Hayward during the oil spill crisis seems to have failed in each of these areas—and flunked managing his impact.

This triple focus demands attention juggling, and leaders who fail at that do so to their own and their organization’s detriment.

20

WHAT MAKES A LEADER?

Back when I was his graduate student at Harvard, David McClelland created a minor storm by publishing a controversial article in the main journal of our profession, theAmerican Psychologist. McClelland reviewed data questioning a hallowed assumption: that doing well in school in itself predicted career success.

He recognized the strong evidence that IQ is the best predictor of what kind of job any given high school student can eventually hold; the score sorts people into workplace roles quite well. Academic abilities (and the IQ they roughly reflect) signal what level of cognitive complexity someone can handle, and so what kind of job. You need to be approximately a standard deviation above average in intelligence (an IQ of 115) to be a professional or high-level executive, for instance.

But what’s little discussed (at least in academic circles, where it’s less apparent) is that once you are at work among a pool of colleagues who are about as smart as you are, your cognitive abilities alone do not make you outstanding—particularly as a leader. There’s a floor effect for IQ when everyone in the group is at the same high level.

McClelland argued that once you were in a given job, specific competencies like self-discipline, empathy, and persuasion were far stronger forces in success than a person’s ranking in academics. He proposed the methodology that has become competence modeling—now common in world-class organizations—for identifying the key abilities that made someone a star performer in a specific organization.

The article, “Testing for Competence Rather Than Intelligence,” was well received among those in organizations who day to day actually evaluated on-the-job performance and had to decide whom to promote, who was the most effective leader, and what talents to groom promising people for. They had hard business metrics for success and failure, and knew that people’s grades and the prestige of the schools they went to had little or nothing to do with their actual effectiveness.

As the former head of a major bank told me, “I was hiring the best and the brightest, but I was still seeing a bell-shaped curve for success and wondering why.” McClelland had the explanation.

But the article was controversial among many academics, some of whom could not grasp that doing well in their courses had little to do with how their students would perform once in a job (unless that job was, say, being a college professor).1

Now, decades after that controversial article, competence models tell a clear story: nonacademic abilities like empathy typically outweigh purely cognitive talents in the makeup of outstanding leaders.2In a study done at Hay Group (which has absorbed McBer, the company McClelland himself founded, and which calls a research division the McClelland Institute), leaders who showed strengths in eight or more of these noncognitive competencies had created highly energizing, top-performing climates.3

But Yvonne Sell, the Hay Group’s director of the leadership and talent practice in the United Kingdom, who did the study, found such leaders are rare: only 18 percent of executives attained this level. Three-quarters of leaders with three or fewer strengths in people skills creatednegativeclimates, where people felt indifferent or demotivated. Lame leadership seems all too prevalent—more than half of leaders fell within this low-impact category.4

Other studies point to the same hard case for soft skills. When Accenture interviewed one hundred CEOs about the skills they needed to run a company successfully, a set of fourteen abilities emerged, from thinking globally and creating an inspiring shared vision to embracing change and tech savvy.5No one person could have them all. But there was one “meta” ability that emerged: self-awareness. Chief executives need this ability to assess their own strengths and weaknesses, and so surround themselves with a team of people whose strengths in those core abilities complement their own.

And yet self-awareness rarely shows up in those lists of competencies that organizations come up with by analyzing the strengths of their star performers.6This subtle variety of focus may be too elusive, though abilities reflecting high cognitive control, which builds on this foundation of self-awareness, are frequent, and include persistence, resilience, and the drive to achieve goals.

Empathy in its many forms, from simple listening to reading the paths of influence in an organization, shows up more often in leadership competence studies. Most of the competencies for high-performing leaders fall into a more visible category that builds on empathy: relationship strengths like influence and persuasion, teamwork and cooperation, and the like. But these most visible leadership abilities build not just on empathy, but also on managing ourselves and sensing how what we do affects others.

The singular focusing ability that allows systems understanding goes under names that vary from organization to organization and competence model to model: big-picture view, pattern recognition, and systems thinking among them. It includes the ability to visualize the dynamics of complex systems and foresee how a decision at one point will ramify to create an effect at a distant one, or sense how what we do today will matter in five weeks, or in months, years, or decades.

The challenge for leaders goes beyond having strengths in all three kinds of focus. The key is finding balance, and using the right one at the right time. The well-focused leader balances the data streams each offers, weaving these strands into seamless action. Putting together data on attention with that on emotional intelligence and performance, this triple focus emerges as a hidden driver of excellence.

FINDING THE RIGHT BALANCE

Take any working group and ask the members, “Who is the leader?” and they’ll be likely to name whoever has the fitting job title.

Now ask them, “Who is the mostinfluentialperson in your group?” The answer to that identifies the informal leader, and tells you how that group actually operates.

These informal leaders are more self-aware than their teammates: they tend to have the smallest gap between their own ratings of their abilities and those by others.7University of New Hampshire psychologist Vanessa Druskat, who did this study, says, “Informal leaders often emerge in a temporary way, and switch in and out. For our research we ask, ‘Who would you say is the informal leader most of the time?’ ”

If that informal leader has strengths in empathy in balance with other abilities, the research shows, the team’s performance tends to be higher. “If the leader has low empathy,” Druskat told me, “and a high level of achievement drive, the leader’s goal-orientation drags down the team performance. But, importantly, if the leader has high levels of empathy and low levels of self-control, performance is also reduced—too much empathy gets in the way of calling people on their misbehaving.”

A bank officer tells me, “I’m in financial services, and I never used the wordempathyat work—until now. The key is tying it to our strategy: employee engagement, good customer experience. Empathy is a way to differentiate us from our competitors. Listening is key.”

She’s in good company; I heard the same message from the CEOs of the Mayo Clinic and the Cleveland Clinic, two of the world’s preeminent hospitals.

And the CEO of one of the world’s largest money management firms tells me that the most ambitious of business school grads apply for jobs at his company, motivated by visions of huge salaries. But, he lamented, he was looking for people “who care about the widows and retired firemen whose life savings we manage”—in other words, an empathic focus that includes the humanity of those whose money is at stake.

On the other hand, a single-minded focus on people is not enough. Take an executive who had started out as a forklift operator, working his way up to head of manufacturing for Asia at a global manufacturing company. Despite his lofty role, chatting with workers on the factory floor was where he felt most comfortable. He knew he should be doing strategic thinking, but he preferred being a “people person.”

“He didn’t have the right balance between his other focus and outer focus,” says Spreier. “He was misfocused, and he wasn’t coming up with strategy well. He didn’t enjoy it—intellectually he knew he should, but emotionally he just was not there.”

There may be a neural challenge for getting the right balance between focusing on hitting a target and sensing how others are reacting. My longtime colleague Richard Boyatzis tells me his research at Case Western Reserve shows that the neural network that engages when we focus on a goal differs from the circuitry for social scanning. “They inhibit each other,” says Boyatzis. “The most successful leaders cycle back and forth between these within seconds.”

Of course companies need leaders who beam in on getting better results. But those results will be more robust in the long run when leaders don’t simply tell people what to do or just do it themselves, but have an other focus: they are motivated to help other people be successful, too.

They realize, for instance, that if someone lacks a given strength today, they can work to develop it. Such leaders take the time to mentor and advise. In practical terms all this means:

•   Listening within, to articulate an authentic vision of overall direction that energizes others even as it sets clear expectations.

•   Coaching, based on listening to what people want from their life, career, and current job. Paying attention to people’s feelings and needs, and showing concern.

•   Listening to advice and expertise; being collaborative and making decisions by consensus when appropriate.

•   Celebrating wins, laughing, knowing that having a good time together is not a waste of time but a way to build emotional capital.

These leadership styles, used in tandem or as appropriate to the moment, widen a leader’s focus to draw on inner, other, and outer inputs. That maximal bandwidth, and the wider understanding and flexibility of response it affords, can pay dividends. Research by the McClelland Institute on these leadership styles shows that more adept leaders draw on these as appropriate—each represents a unique focus and application. The wider a leader’s repertoire of styles, the more energized the organization’s climate and the better the results.8

APERTURE

The head of a health company was assessing a group of forty-plus managers whom he was directing in a new job. In a meeting where each stood up to raise issues, he noticed carefully how the other managers paid attention to the person speaking. Everyone was riveted on one manager and really listening, he saw, while when another stood up to speak peoples’ eyes went down to their tables—a sure sign that he had lost them.

Emotional aperture, the ability to perceive such subtle cues in a group, operates a bit like a camera. We can zoom in to focus on one person’s feelings, or zoom out to take in the collective—whether a classroom or a work group.

For leaders, aperture ensures a more accurate reading, for example, of support or antagonism for a proposal. Reading it well can mean the difference between a failed initiative and a helpful midcourse correction.9

Picking up telltale emotional cues such as tone of voice, facial expressions, and the like at a group level can tell you, for instance, how many in a group are feeling fear or anger, how many hope and positivity—or contempt and indifference. Those cues give a quicker and more true assessment of the group’s feelings than, say, asking what they are feeling.

At work, collective emotions—sometimes called organizational climate—make a huge difference in, for example, customer service, absenteeism, and group performance in general.

A more nuanced sense of the range of emotions in a group—how many feel fear, hope, and the rest of the emotional gamut—can help a leader make decisions that transform fear to hope or contempt to positivity.

One hurdle in such a wide-aperture view, it turns out, is the implicit attitude at work that professionalism demands we ignore our emotions. Some trace this emotional blind spot to the work ethic embedded in the norms of workplaces in the West, which sees work as a moral obligation that demands suppressing attention to our relationships and what we feel. In this all-too-common view, paying attention to these human dimensions undermines business effectiveness.

But organizational research over the last decades provides ample evidence that this is a misguided assumption, and that the most adept team members or leaders use a wide aperture to gather the emotional information they need to deal well with their teammates’ or employees’ emotional needs.

Whether we notice the emotional forest or just zero in on one tree determines our aperture. When people saw cartoons depicting, for example, one person smiling surrounded by others frowning, eye-tracking devices revealed that most viewers narrowed their attention to just the smiling face, ignoring the others.10

There seems to be a bias (at least among college students in the West, who are the bulk of subjects in such studies in psychology) to ignore the larger collective. In East Asian society, by contrast, people more naturally take in broad patterns in a group—a wide aperture comes easily.

Leadership maven Warren Bennis uses the term “first-class noticers” for those who bring a finely honed attention to every situation, and a constant, sometimes infectious sense of fascination with what’s going on in the moment. Great listeners are one variety of first-class noticers.

Two of the main mental ruts that threaten the ability to notice are unquestioned assumptions and overly relied-on rules of thumb. These need to be tested and refined time and again against changing realities. One way to do this is through what Harvard psychologist Ellen Langer calls environmental mindfulness: constant questioning and listening; inquiry, probing, and reflecting—gathering insights and perspectives from other people. This active engagement leads to smarter questions, better learning, and a more sensitive early warning radar for coming changes.

THE SYSTEMS BRAIN

Consider an executive identified in a study of those in government posts whose track record marked them as innovative, successful leaders.11

His first job for the navy was in a ship’s radio room. He soon mastered the radio system and, he said, “I knew it better than anyone on the ship. I was the one they came to with problems. But I realized that if I was going to be a success I had to master the ship.”

So he applied himself to learning how the different parts of the ship worked together, and how each interacted with the radio room. Later in his career, when he got promoted to a much bigger job as a civilian working for the navy, he said, “Just as I mastered the radio room, and then the ship, I realized I had to master how the navy works.”

While some of us have a knack for systems, for many or most leaders—like this executive—it is an acquired strength. But systems awareness in the absence of self-awareness and empathy will not be sufficient for outstanding leadership. We need to balance the triple focus, not depend on having just one strength.

Now consider the Larry Summers paradox: he no doubt has a genius IQ and brilliance as a systems thinker. He was, after all, one of the youngest professors to get tenure in Harvard’s history. But years later Summers was, in effect, fired as Harvard president by its faculty, who were fed up with his insensitive blunders—most notably dismissing women’s capabilities for science.

That pattern seems to fit what the University of Oxford’s Simon Baron-Cohen has identified as an extreme brain style, one that excels at systems analysis but flunks empathy and the sensitivity to social context that comes along with it.12

Baron-Cohen’s research finds that in a small—but significant—number of people this strength comes coupled with a blind spot for what other people are feeling and thinking, and for reading social situations. For that reason, while people with superior systems understanding are organizational assets, they are not necessarily effective leaders if they lack the requisite emotional intelligence.

An executive at one bank explained to me how the bank has created a career ladder for those with this talent set that allows them to progress in status and salary on the basis of their solo talents as brilliant systems analysts rather than by climbing the leadership ranks. That way the bank can keep this talented crew and have them advance in their career, while recruiting leaders from a different pool. Those leaders can then consult their systems expertise as needed.

THE WELL-FOCUSED TEAM

At an international organization people were hired solely for their technical expertise, without regard for their personal or interpersonal abilities—including teamwork. Perhaps predictably, a one-hundred-member team there had a breakdown, with lots of friction and constant missed deadlines.

“The head of the team never had the chance to stop and reflect with someone,” I was told by the leadership coach who was brought in to help. “He didn’t have a single friend he could talk to openly. When I gave him the opportunity for reflection, we started with his dreams, then his problems.

“When we stepped back to look at his team he realized he’d been seeing everything through a single small lens—how they were constantly disappointing him—but hadn’t been thinking aboutwhypeople were behaving the way they were. He had no perspective-taking; he couldn’t see things from the team members’ point of view.”

The team leader focused his thinking on what was wrong with the members, their specific failings, and his indignation that they were torpedoing his own performance. He found it easy to blame their shortcomings.

But once he was able to shift his focus to the team’s perspective on what wasn’t working, his diagnosis of the trouble changed. He realized that resentments among team members were rampant. The theory-oriented basic scientists disdained the more pragmatic, get-it-done engineers, who in turn put down what they saw as head-in-the-clouds researchers.

Another variety of strife was nationalistic. The huge team was like a tiny United Nations, with members drawn from countries around the world—a goodly number of which were in conflict with each other—and those conflicts mapped onto many of the tensions between people.

The group rhetoric was that these divides didn’t exist (and sowe can’t talk about it)—but in fact, the head of the team saw, he needed to get it out on the table. “So that’s where he started to put things right,” his coach said.

Vanessa Druskat finds that top-performing teams follow norms that enhance the collective self-awareness, such as by surfacing simmering disagreements and settling them before they boil over.

One resource for dealing with the team’s emotions: create time and space to talk about what’s on people’s mind. Druskat’s research, done with Steven Wolff, finds that many teams don’t do this—it’s the least frequently demonstrated norm of those they study. “But if a team does this,” she says, “there’s a large positive payoff.

“I was in North Carolina working with a team, and the resource we used to help them discuss emotion-laden issues was a large ceramic elephant,” Druskat told me. “They all agreed to a norm that said, ‘Anyone, anytime, can pick up the elephant and say, “I want to raise an elephant,” ’ meaning bring up something that’s bothering them.

“Right away, one guy—and these are all top executives—did it. He started talking about how swamped he was and how the other folks on the team didn’t realize it and were making too many demands on his time. He told them, ‘You’ve got to realize this is my busy season.’ His colleagues told him they had no idea, and had been wondering why he had been so unresponsive. Some had been taking it personally. After that there was a flood of others speaking up, getting things off their chest, clearing the air. In less than an hour it seemed like a completely different team.”

“To harvest the collective wisdom of a group, you need two things: mindful presence and a sense of safety,” says Steven Wolff, a principal at GEI Partners.13“You need a shared mental model that this is a safe place—Not,If I say the wrong thing I’ll get a note in my file. People need to feel free to speak out.

“Being present,” Wolff clarifies, “means being aware of what’s going on and inquiring into it. I’ve learned to appreciate negative emotions—it’s not that I enjoy them, but that they signal a pot of gold at the end of the rainbow if we can stay present to them. When you feel a negative emotion, stop and ask yourself, ‘What’s going on here?’ so you can begin to understand the issue behind the feelings and then make what is going on within you visible to the team. But that requires the group be a safe container, so you can say what’s actually going on.”

This collective act of self-awareness clears the air of emotional static. “Our research,” Wolff adds, “shows that is one sign of a high-performing team. They make it easy to give time to bring up and explore team members’ negative feelings.”

As with individuals, top teams excel in the triple focus. For a team, self-awareness means tuning in to the needs of members, surfacing issues, and being intentional about setting norms that help—like “raising the elephant.” Some teams make time for a daily “check-in” at the start of a meeting to ask how each person is doing.

A team’s empathy applies not just to sensitivity among members, but also to understanding the view and feelings of other people and groups the team deals with—group-level empathy.

The best teams also read the organization’s dynamics effectively; Druskat and Wolff find that this kind of system awareness is strongly linked to positive team performance.

Team focus can take the form of both whom in the wider organization to help and where to get the resources and attention teams need to accomplish their own goals. Or it can mean learning what the concerns are of others in the organization who can influence the team’s capabilities, or asking whether what the team is considering fits the larger strategy and goals of the outfit.

Top teams also periodically reflect on their functioning as a group to make needed changes. This exercise in group self-awareness allows frank feedback from within, which, Druskat tells me, “boosts the group effectiveness, especially at first.”

They also create a positive atmosphere; having fun is a sign of shared flow. Tim Brown, CEO of IDEO, an innovations consultancy, calls it “serious play.” He says, “Play equals trust, a space where people can take risks. Only by taking risks do we get to the most valuable new ideas.”