Chapter 5.Feature Engineering

In 2014, the paper“Practical Lessons from Predicting Clicks on Ads at Facebook”claimed that having the right features is the most important thing in developing their ML models. Since then, many of the companies that I’ve worked with have discovered time and time again that once they have a workable model, having the right features tends to give them the biggest performance boost compared to clever algorithmic techniques such as hyperparameter tuning. State-of-the-art model architectures can still perform poorly if they don’t use a good set of features.

Due to its importance, a large part of many ML engineering and data science jobs is to come up with new useful features. In this chapter, we will go over common techniques and important considerations with respect to feature engineering. We will dedicate a section to go into detail about a subtle yet disastrous problem that has derailed many ML systems in production: data leakage and how to detect andavoid it.

We will end the chapter discussing how to engineer good features, taking into account both the feature importance and feature generalization. Talking about feature engineering, some people might think of feature stores. Since feature stores are closer to infrastructure to support multiple ML applications, we’ll cover feature stores inChapter 10.

Learned Features Versus Engineered Features

When I cover this topic in class, mystudents frequently ask: “Why do we have to worry about feature engineering? Doesn’t deep learning promise us that we no longer have to engineer features?”

They are right. The promise of deep learning is that we won’t have to handcraft features. For this reason, deep learning is sometimes called feature learning.1Many features can be automatically learned and extracted by algorithms. However, we’re still far from the point where all features can be automated. This is not to mention that, as of this writing, the majority of ML applications in production aren’t deep learning. Let’s go over an example to understand what features can be automatically extracted and what features still need to be handcrafted.

Imagine that you want to builda sentiment analysis classifier to classify whether a comment is spam or not. Before deep learning, when given a piece of text, you would have to manually apply classical text processing techniques such as lemmatization, expanding contractions, removing punctuation, and lowercasing everything. After that, you might want to split your text into n-grams withnvalues of your choice.​​

For those unfamiliar, an n-gram is a contiguous sequence ofnitems from a given sample of text. Theitems can be phonemes, syllables, letters, or words. For example, given the post “I like food,” its word-level 1-grams are [“I”, “like”, “food”] and its word-level 2-grams are [“I like”, “like food”]. This sentence’s set of n-gram features, if we wantnto be 1 and 2, is: [“I”, “like”, “food”, “I like”, “like food”].

Figure 5-1shows an example of classical text processing techniques you can use to handcraft n-gram features for your text.

Once you’ve generated n-grams foryour training data, you can create a vocabulary that maps each n-gram to an index. Then you can convert each post into a vector based on its n-grams’ indices. For example, if we have a vocabulary of seven n-grams as shown inTable 5-1, each post can be a vector of seven elements. Each element corresponds to the number of times the n-gram at that index appears in the post. “I like food” will be encoded as the vector [1, 1, 0, 1, 1, 0, 1]. This vector can then be used as an input into an ML model.

Feature engineering requires knowledge of domain-specific techniques—in this case, the domain is natural language processing (NLP) and the native language of the text. It tends to be an iterativeprocess, which can be brittle. When I followed this method for one of my early NLP projects, I kept having to restart my process either because I had forgotten to apply one technique or because one technique I used turned out to be working poorly and I had to undo it.

However, much of this pain has been alleviated since the rise of deep learning. Instead of having to worry about lemmatization, punctuation, or stopword removal, you can just split your raw text into words (i.e., tokenization), create a vocabulary out of those words, and convert each of your words into one-shot vectors using this vocabulary. Your model will hopefully learn to extract useful features from this. In this new method, much of feature engineering for text has been automated. Similar progress has been made for images too. Instead of having to manually extract features from raw images and input those features into your ML models, you can just input raw images directly into your deep learning models.

However, an ML system will likely need data beyond just text and images. For example, when detecting whether a comment is spam or not, on top of the text in the comment itself, you might want to use other information about:

How many upvotes/downvotes does it have?

When was this account created, how often do they post, and how many upvotes/downvotes do they have?

How many views does it have? Popular threads tend to attract more spam.

There are many possible features to use in your model. Some of them are shown inFigure 5-2. The process of choosing what information to use and how to extract this information into a format usable by your ML models is feature engineering. For complex tasks such as recommending videos for users to watch next on TikTok, the number of features used can go up to millions. For domain-specific tasks such as predicting whether a transaction is fraudulent, you might need subject matter expertise withbanking and frauds to be able to come up with useful features.

Common Feature Engineering Operations

Because of the importance and the ubiquity of feature engineering in ML projects, there have been many techniques developed to streamline the process. In this section, we will discuss several of the most important operations that you might want to consider while engineering features from your data. They include handling missing values, scaling, discretization, encoding categorical features, and generating the old-school but still very effective cross features as well as the newer and exciting positional features. This list is nowhere near being comprehensive, but it does comprise some of the most common and useful operations to give you a good starting point. Let’s dive in!

Handling Missing Values

One of the first things you might noticewhen dealing with data in production is that some values are missing. However, one thing that many ML engineers I’ve interviewed don’t know is that not all types of missing values are equal.2To illustrate this point, consider the task of predicting whether someone is going to buy a house in the next 12 months. A portion of the data we have is inTable 5-2.

There are three types of missing values. The official names for these types are a little bit confusing, so we’ll go into detailed examples to mitigate the confusion.

This is when the reason a value is missingis because of the true value itself. In this example, we might notice that some respondents didn’t disclose their income. Upon investigation it may turn out that the income of respondents who failed to report tends to be higher than that of those who did disclose.The income values are missing for reasons related to the values themselves.

This is when the reason avalue is missing is not due to the value itself, but due to another observed variable. Inthis example, we might notice that age values are often missing for respondents of the gender “A,” which might be because the people of gender A in this survey don’t like disclosing their age.

This is whenthere’s no pattern in whenthe value is missing. In this example, we might think that the missing values for the column “Job” might be completely random, not because of the job itself and not because of any other variable. People just forget to fill in that value sometimes for no particular reason. However, this type of missing is very rare. There are usually reasons why certain values are missing, and you should investigate.

When encountering missing values, you can either fill in the missing values with certain values (imputation) or remove the missing values (deletion). We’ll go over both.

Deletion

When I ask candidates about how tohandle missing values during interviews, many tend to prefer deletion, not because it’s a better method, but because it’s easier to do.

One way to delete iscolumn deletion: if a variable has too many missing values, just remove thatvariable. For example, in the example above, over 50% of the values for the variable “Marital status” are missing, so you might be tempted to remove this variable from your model. The drawback of this approach is that you might remove important information and reduce the accuracy of your model. Marital status might be highly correlated to buying houses, as married couples are much more likely to be homeowners than single people.3

Another way to delete isrow deletion: if a sample has missing value(s), just remove that sample. This methodcan work when the missing values are completely at random (MCAR) and the number of examples with missing values is small, such as less than 0.1%. You don’t want to do row deletion if that means 10% of your data samples are removed.

However, removing rows of data can also remove important information that your model needs to make predictions, especially if the missing values are not at random (MNAR). For example, you don’t want to remove samples of gender B respondents with missing income because the fact that income is missing is information itself (missing income might mean higher income, and thus, more correlated to buying a house) and can be used to make predictions.

On top of that, removing rows of data can create biases in your model, especially if the missing values are at random (MAR). For example, if you remove all examples missing age values in the data inTable 5-2, you will remove all respondents with gender A from your data, and your model won’t be able to make good predictions for respondents with gender A.

Imputation

Even though deletion is tempting becauseit’s easy to do, deleting data can lead to losing important information and introduce biases into your model. If you don’t want to delete missing values, you will have to impute them, which means “fill them with certain values.” Deciding which “certain values” to use is the hard part.

One common practice is to fill in missing values with their defaults. For example, if the job is missing, you might fill it with an empty string “”. Another common practice is to fill in missing values with the mean, median, or mode (the most common value). For example, if the temperature value is missing for a data sample whose month value is July, it’s not a bad idea to fill it with the median temperature of July.

Both practices work well in many cases, but sometimes they can cause hair-pulling bugs. One time, in one of the projects I was helping with, we discovered that the model was spitting out garbage because the app’s frontend no longer asked users to enter their age, so age values were missing, and the model filled them with 0. But the model never saw the age value of 0 during training, so it couldn’t make reasonable predictions.

In general, you want to avoid filling missing values with possible values, such as filling the missing number of children with 0—0 is a possible value for the number of children. It makes it hard to distinguish between people whose information is missing and people who don’t have children.

Multiple techniques might be used at the same time or in sequence to handle missing values for a particular set of data. Regardless of what techniques you use, one thing is certain: there is no perfect way to handle missing values. With deletion, you risk losing important information or accentuating biases. With imputation, you risk injecting your own biasinto and adding noise to your data, or worse, data leakage. If you don’t know what data leakage is, don’t panic, we’ll cover it in the section“Data Leakage”.

Scaling

Consider the task of predictingwhether someone will buy a house in the next 12 months, and the data shown inTable 5-2. The values of the variable Age in our data range from 20 to 40, whereas the values of the variable Annual Income range from 10,000 to 150,000. When we input these two variables into an ML model, it won’t understand that 150,000 and 40 represent different things. It will just see them both as numbers, and because the number 150,000 is much bigger than 40, it might give it more importance, regardless of which variable is actually more useful for generating predictions.

Before inputting features into models, it’s important to scale them to be similar ranges. This process is calledfeature scaling. This is one of the simplest things you can do that often results in a performance boost for your model. Neglecting to do so can cause your model to make gibberish predictions, especially with classical algorithms like gradient-boosted trees and logistic regression.4

An intuitive way to scale your features is to get them to be in the range [0, 1]. Given a variablex, its values can be rescaled to be in this range using the following formula:

You can validate that ifxis the maximum value, the scaled valuex′ will be 1. Ifxis the minimum value, the scaled valuex′ will be 0.

If you want your feature to be in an arbitrary range [a,b]—empirically, I find the range [–1, 1] to work better than the range [0, 1]—you can use the following formula:

Scaling to an arbitrary range works well when you don’t want to make any assumptions about your variables. If you think that your variables might follow a normal distribution, it might be helpful to normalize them so that they have zero mean and unit variance. This process is calledstandardization:

withx¯being the mean of variablex, andσbeing its standard deviation.

In practice, ML models tend tostruggle with features that follow a skewed distribution. To help mitigate the skewness, a technique commonly used islog transformation: apply the log function to your feature. An example of how the log transformation can make your data less skewed is shown inFigure 5-3. While this technique can yield performance gain in many cases, it doesn’t work for all cases, and you should be wary of the analysis performed on log-transformed data instead of the original data.5

There are two important things to note about scaling. One is that it’s a common source of data leakage (this will be covered in greater detail in the section“Data Leakage”). Another is that it often requires global statistics—you have to look at the entire or a subset of training data to calculate its min, max, or mean. During inference, you reuse the statistics you had obtained during training to scale new data. If the new data has changed significantly compared to the training, these statistics won’t be very useful. Therefore, it’s important to retrain your model often to accountfor these changes.

Discretization

This technique is included in this book forcompleteness, though in practice, I’ve rarely found discretization to help. Imagine that we’ve built a model with the data inTable 5-2. During training, our model has seen the annual income values of “150,000,” “50,000,” “100,000,” and so on. During inference, our model encounters an example with an annual income of “9,000.50.”

Intuitively, we know that $9,000.50 a year isn’t much different from $10,000/year, and we want our model to treat both of them the same way. But the model doesn’t know that. Our model only knows that 9,000.50 is different from 10,000, and it will treat them differently.

Discretization is the process of turning a continuous feature into a discrete feature. This process is also known as quantization or binning. This is done by creating buckets for the given values. For annual income, you might want to group them into three buckets as follows:

Lower income: less than $35,000/year

Lower income: less than $35,000/year

Middle income: between $35,000 and $100,000/year

Middle income: between $35,000 and $100,000/year

Upper income: more than $100,000/year

Upper income: more than $100,000/year

Instead of having to learn an infinite number of possible incomes, our model can focus on learning only three categories, which is a much easier task to learn. This technique is supposed to be more helpful with limited training data.

Even though, by definition, discretization is meant for continuous features, it can be used for discrete features too. The age variable is discrete, but it might still be useful to group the values into buckets such as follows:

Less than 18

Less than 18

Between 18 and 22

Between 18 and 22

Between 22 and 30

Between 22 and 30

Between 30 and 40

Between 30 and 40

Between 40 and 65

Between 40 and 65

Over 65

Over 65

The downside is that this categorization introduces discontinuities at the category boundaries—$34,999 is now treated as completely different from $35,000, which is treated the same as $100,000. Choosing the boundaries of categories might not be all that easy. You can try to plotthe histograms of the values and choose the boundaries that make sense. In general, common sense, basic quantiles, and sometimes subject matter expertise can help.

Encoding Categorical Features

We’ve talked about how to turn continuousfeatures into categorical features. In this section, we’ll discuss how to best handle categorical features.

People who haven’t worked with data in production tend to assume that categories arestatic, which means the categories don’t change over time. This is true for many categories. For example, age brackets and income brackets are unlikely to change, and you know exactly how many categories there are in advance. Handling these categories is straightforward. You can just give each category a number and you’re done.

However, in production, categories change. Imagine you’re building a recommender system to predict what products users might want to buy from Amazon. One of the features you want to use is the product brand. When looking at Amazon’s historical data, you realize that there are a lot of brands. Even back in 2019, there were already over two million brands on Amazon!6

The number of brands is overwhelming, but you think: “I can still handle this.” You encode each brand as a number, so now you have two million numbers, from 0 to 1,999,999, corresponding to two million brands. Your model does spectacularly on the historical test set, and you get approval to test it on 1% of today’s traffic.

In production, your model crashes because it encounters a brand it hasn’t seen before and therefore can’t encode. New brands join Amazon all the time. To address this, you create a category UNKNOWN with the value of 2,000,000 to catch all the brands your model hasn’t seen during training.

Your model doesn’t crash anymore, but your sellers complain that their new brands are not getting any traffic. It’s because your model didn’t see the category UNKNOWN in the train set, so it just doesn’t recommend any product of the UNKNOWN brand. You fix this by encoding only the top 99% most popular brands and encode the bottom 1% brand as UNKNOWN. This way, at least your model knows how to deal with UNKNOWN brands.

Your model seems to work fine for about one hour, then the click-through rate on product recommendations plummets. Over the last hour, 20 new brands joined your site; some of them are new luxury brands, some of them are sketchy knockoff brands, some of them are established brands. However, your model treats them all the same way it treats unpopular brands in the training data.

This isn’t an extreme example that only happens if you work at Amazon. This problem happens quite a lot. For example, if you want to predict whether a comment is spam, you might want to use the account that posted this comment as a feature, and new accounts are being created all the time. The same goes for new product types, new website domains, new restaurants, new companies, new IP addresses, and so on. If you work with any of them, you’ll have to deal with this problem.

Finding a way to solve this problem turns out to be surprisingly difficult. You don’t want to put them into a set of buckets because it can be really hard—how would you even go about putting new user accounts into different groups?

One solution to this problemis thehashing trick, popularized by the package Vowpal Wabbit developed at Microsoft.7The gist of this trick is that you use a hash function to generate a hashed value of each category. The hashed value will become the index of that category. Because you can specify the hash space, you can fix the number of encoded values for a feature in advance, without having to know how many categories there will be. For example, if you choose a hash space of 18 bits, which corresponds to 218= 262,144 possible hashed values, all the categories, even the ones that your model has never seen before, will be encoded by an index between 0 and 262,143.

One problem with hashed functions is collision: two categories being assigned the same index. However, with many hash functions, the collisions are random; new brands can share an index with any of the existing brands instead of always sharing an index with unpopular brands, which is what happens when we use the preceding UNKNOWN category. The impact of colliding hashed features is, fortunately, not that bad. In research done by Booking.com, even for 50% colliding features, the performance loss is less than 0.5%, as shown inFigure 5-4.8

You can choose a hash space large enough to reduce the collision. You can also choose a hash function with properties that you want, such as a locality-sensitive hashing function where similar categories (such as websites with similar names) are hashed into values close to each other.

Because it’s a trick, it’s often considered hacky by academics and excluded from ML curricula. But its wide adoption in the industry is a testimonial to how effective the trick is. It’s essential to Vowpal Wabbit and it’s part of the frameworks of scikit-learn, TensorFlow, and gensim. It can be especially useful in continual learning settings where your modellearns from incoming examples in production. We’ll cover continual learning inChapter 9.

Feature Crossing

Feature crossing is the techniqueto combine two or more features to generate new features. This technique is useful to model the nonlinear relationships between features. For example, for the task of predicting whether someone will want to buy a house in the next 12 months, you suspect that there might be a nonlinear relationship between marital status and number of children, so you combine them to create a new feature “marriage and children” as inTable 5-3.

Because feature crossing helps model nonlinear relationships between variables, it’s essential for models that can’t learn or are bad at learning nonlinear relationships, such as linear regression, logistic regression, and tree-based models. It’s less important in neural networks, but it can still be useful because explicit feature crossing occasionally helps neural networks learn nonlinear relationships faster. DeepFM and xDeepFM are the family of models that have successfully leveraged explicit feature interactions for recommender systems and click-through-rate prediction.9

A caveat of feature crossing is that it can make your feature space blow up. Imagine feature A has 100 possible values and feature B has 100 possible features; crossing these two features will result in a feature with 100 × 100 = 10,000 possible values. You will need a lot more data for models to learn all these possible values. Another caveat is that because feature crossing increases the number of features models use, it can make models overfit to the training data.

Discrete and Continuous Positional Embeddings

First introduced to the deep learning community in the paper“Attention Is All You Need”(Vaswani et al. 2017), positional embedding has become astandard data engineering technique for many applications in both computer vision and NLP. We’ll walk through an example to show why positional embedding is necessary and how to do it.

Consider the task of language modeling where you want to predict the next token (e.g., a word, character, or subword) based on the previous sequence of tokens. In practice, a sequence length can be up to 512, if not larger. However, for simplicity, let’s use words as our tokens and use the sequence length of 8. Given an arbitrary sequence of 8 words, such as “Sometimes all I really want to do is,” we want to predict the next word.

An embedding is a vectorthat represents a piece of data. We call the set of all possible embeddings generated by the same algorithm for a type of data “an embedding space.” All embedding vectors in the same space are of the same size.

One of the most common uses of embeddings is word embeddings, where you can represent each word with a vector. However, embeddings for other types of data are increasingly popular. For example, ecommerce solutions like Criteo and Coveo have embeddings for products.10Pinterest has embeddings for images, graphs, queries, and even users.11Given that there are so many types of data with embeddings, there has been a lot of interest in creating universal embeddings for multimodal data.

If we use a recurrent neural network, it will process words in sequential order, which means the order ofwords is implicitly inputted. However, if we use a model like a transformer, words are processed in parallel, so words’ positions need to be explicitly inputted so that our model knows the order of these words (“a dog bites a child” is very different from “a child bites a dog”). We don’t want to input the absolute positions, 0, 1, 2, …, 7, into our model because empirically, neural networks don’t work well with inputs that aren’t unit-variance (that’s why we scale our features, as discussed previously in the section“Scaling”).

If we rescale the positions to between 0 and 1, so 0, 1, 2, …, 7 become 0, 0.143, 0.286, …, 1, the differences between the two positions will be too small for neural networks to learn to differentiate.

A way to handle position embeddings is to treat it the way we’d treat word embedding. With word embedding, we use an embedding matrix with the vocabulary size as its number of columns, and each column is the embedding for the word at the index of that column. With position embedding, the number of columns is the number of positions. In our case, since we only work with the previous sequence size of 8, the positions go from 0 to 7 (seeFigure 5-5).

The embedding size for positions is usually the same as the embedding size for words so that they can be summed. For example, the embedding for the word “food” at position 0 is the sum of the embedding vector for the word “food” and the embedding vector for position 0. This is the way position embeddings are implemented in Hugging Face’s BERT as of August 2021. Because the embeddings change as the model weights get updated, we say that the position embeddings are learned.

Position embeddings can also be fixed. The embedding for each position is still a vector withSelements (Sis the position embedding size), but each element is predefined using a function, usually sine and cosine. Inthe original Transformer paper, if the element is at an even index, use sine. Else, use cosine. SeeFigure 5-6.

Fixed positional embeddingis a special case of what is known as Fourier features. If positions in positional embeddings are discrete, Fourier features can also be continuous. Consider the task involving representations of 3D objects, such as a teapot. Each position on the surface of the teapot is represented by a three-dimensional coordinate, which is continuous. When positions are continuous, it’d be very hard to build an embedding matrix with continuous column indices, but fixed position embeddings using sine and cosine functions still work.

The following is the generalized format for theembedding vector at coordinatev, also called the Fourier features of coordinatev. Fourier features have been shown to improve models’ performancefor tasks that take in coordinates (or positions) as inputs. If interested, you might want to read more about it in“Fourier Features Let Networks Learn High Frequency Functions in Low Dimensional Domains”(Tancik et al. 2020).

Data Leakage

In July 2021,MIT Technology Reviewran a provocative article titled “Hundreds of AI Tools Have Been Built to Catch Covid. None of Them Helped.” These models were trained topredict COVID-19 risks from medical scans. The article listed multiple examples where ML models that performed well during evaluation failed to be usable in actual production settings.

In one example, researchers trained their model on a mix of scans taken when patients were lying down and standing up. “Because patients scanned while lying down were more likely to be seriously ill, the model learned to predict serious covid risk from a person’s position.”

In some other cases, models were “found to be picking up on the text font that certain hospitals used to label the scans. As a result, fonts from hospitals with more serious caseloads became predictors of covid risk.”12

Both of these are examples of data leakage.Data leakagerefers to the phenomenon when a form of the label “leaks” into the set of features used for making predictions, and this same information is not available during inference.

Data leakage is challenging because often the leakage is nonobvious. It’s dangerous because it can cause your models to fail in an unexpected and spectacular way, even after extensive evaluation and testing. Let’s go over another example to demonstrate what data leakage is.

Suppose you want to build an ML model to predict whether a CT scan of a lung shows signs of cancer. You obtained the data from hospital A, removed the doctors’ diagnosis from the data, and trained your model. It did really well on the test data from hospital A, but poorly on the data from hospital B.

After extensive investigation, you learned that at hospital A, when doctors think that a patient has lung cancer, they send that patient to a more advanced scan machine, which outputs slightly different CT scan images. Your model learned to rely on the information on the scan machine used to make predictions on whether a scan image shows signs of lung cancer. Hospital B sends the patients to different CT scan machines at random, so your model has no information to rely on. We say that labels are leaked into the features during training.

Data leakage can happen not only with newcomers to the field, but has also happened to several experienced researchers whose work I admire, and in one of my own projects. Despite its prevalence, data leakage is rarely covered in ML curricula.

In 2020, the University of Liverpool launched anIon Switching competition on Kaggle. The task was to identify the number of ion channels open at each time point. They synthesized test data from training data, and somepeople were able to reverse engineer and obtain test labels from the leak.13The two winning teams in this competition are the two teams that were able to exploit the leak, though they might have still been able to win without exploiting the leak.14

Common Causes for Data Leakage

In this section, we’ll go over some common causes for data leakage and how to avoid them.

Splitting time-correlated data randomly instead of by time

When I learned ML in college, I was taughtto randomly split my data into train, validation, and test splits. This is also how data is often reportedly split in ML research papers. However, this is also one common cause for data leakage.

In many cases, data is time-correlated, which means that the time the data is generated affects its label distribution. Sometimes, the correlation is obvious, as in the case of stock prices. To oversimplify it, the prices of similar stocks tend to move together. If 90% of the tech stocks go down today, it’s very likely the other 10% of the tech stocks go down too. When building models to predict the future stock prices, you want to split your training data by time, such as training your model on data from the first six days and evaluating it on data from the seventh day. If you randomly split your data, prices from the seventh day will be included in your train split and leak into your model the condition of the market on that day. We say that the information from the future is leaked into the training process.

However, in many cases, the correlation is nonobvious. Consider the task of predicting whether someone will click on a song recommendation. Whether someone will listen to a song depends not only on their music taste but also on the general music trend that day. If an artist passes away one day, people will be much more likely to listen to that artist. By including samples from a certain day in the train split, information about the music trend that day will be passed into your model, making it easier for it to make predictions on other samples on that same day.

To prevent future information from leaking into the training process and allowing models to cheat during evaluation, split your data by time, instead of splitting randomly, whenever possible. For example, if you have data from five weeks, use the first four weeks for the train split, then randomly split week 5 into validation and test splits as shown inFigure 5-7.

Scaling before splitting

As discussed in the section“Scaling”, it’s important to scale yourfeatures. Scaling requires global statistics—e.g., mean, variance—of your data. One common mistake is to use the entire training data to generate global statistics before splitting it into different splits, leaking the mean and variance of the test samples into the training process, allowing a model to adjust its predictions for the test samples. This information isn’t available in production, so the model’s performance will likely degrade.

To avoid this type of leakage, always split your data first before scaling, then use the statistics from the train split to scale all the splits. Some even suggest that we split our data before any exploratory data analysis and data processing, so that we don’t accidentally gain information about the test split.

Filling in missing data with statistics from the test split

One common way to handle the missing valuesof a feature is to fill (input) them with the mean or median of all values present. Leakage might occur if the mean or median is calculated using entire data instead of just the train split. This type of leakage is similar to the type of leakage caused by scaling, and it can be prevented by using only statistics from the train split to fill in missing values in all the splits.

Poor handling of data duplication before splitting

If you have duplicates or near-duplicates in your data, failing to remove them before splitting your datamight cause the same samples to appear in both train and validation/test splits. Data duplication is quite common in the industry, and has also been found in popular research datasets. For example, CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 are two popular datasets used for computer vision research. They were released in 2009, yet it was not until 2019 that Barz and Denzler discovered that 3.3% and 10% of the images from the test sets of the CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 datasets have duplicates in the training set.15

Data duplication can result from data collection or merging of different data sources. A 2021Naturearticle listed data duplication as a common pitfall when using ML to detect COVID-19, which happened because “one dataset combined several other datasets without realizing that one of the component datasets already contains another component.”16Data duplication can also happen because of data processing—for example, oversampling might result in duplicating certain examples.

To avoid this, always check for duplicates before splitting and also after splitting just to make sure. If you oversample your data, do it after splitting.

Group leakage

A group of examples have stronglycorrelated labels but are divided into different splits. For example, a patient might have two lung CT scans that are a week apart, which likely have the same labels on whether they contain signs of lung cancer, but one of them is in the train split and the second is in the test split. This type of leakage is common for objective detection tasks that contain photos of the same object taken milliseconds apart—some of them landed in the train split while others landed in the test split. It’s hard avoiding this type of data leakage without understanding how your data was generated.

Leakage from data generation process

The example earlier about how information on whether a CT scan shows signs of lung cancer is leaked via the scanmachine is an example of this type of leakage. Detecting this type of data leakage requires a deep understanding of the way data is collected. For example, it would be very hard to figure out that the model’s poor performance in hospital B is due to its different scan machine procedure if you don’t know about different scan machines or that the procedures at the two hospitals are different.

There’s no foolproof way to avoid this type of leakage, but you can mitigate the risk by keeping track of the sources of your data and understanding how it is collected and processed. Normalize your data so that data from different sources can have the same means and variances. If different CT scan machines output images with different resolutions, normalizing all the images to have the same resolution would make it harder for models to know which image is from which scan machine. And don’t forget to incorporate subject matter experts, who might have more contexts on how data is collected and used, into the ML design process!

Detecting Data Leakage

Data leakage can happen during many steps, from generating, collecting, sampling, splitting, and processing data tofeature engineering. It’s important to monitor for data leakage during the entire lifecycle of an ML project.

Measure the predictive power of each feature or a set of features with respect to the target variable (label). If a feature has unusually high correlation, investigate how this feature is generated and whether the correlation makes sense. It’s possible that two features independently don’t contain leakage, but two featurestogether can contain leakage. For example, when building a model to predict how long an employee will stay at a company, the starting date and the end date separately doesn’t tell us much about their tenure, but both together can give us that information.

Do ablation studies to measure how important a feature or a set of features is to your model. If removing a feature causes the model’s performance to deteriorate significantly, investigate why that feature is so important. If you have a massive amount of features, say a thousand features, it might be infeasible to do ablation studies on every possible combination of them, but it can still be useful to occasionally do ablation studies with a subset of features that you suspect the most. This is another example of how subject matter expertise can come in handy in feature engineering. Ablation studies can be run offline at your own schedule, so you can leverage your machines during downtime for this purpose.

Keep an eye out for new features added to your model. If adding a new feature significantly improves your model’s performance, either that feature is really good or that feature just contains leaked information about labels.

Be very careful every time you look at the test split. If you use the test split in any way other than to report a model’s final performance, whether to come up with ideas for new features or to tune hyperparameters, you risk leaking information from the future into your training process.

Engineering Good Features

Generally, adding more features leads to better model performance. In my experience, the list of features used for a model in production only grows over time. However, more features doesn’t always mean better model performance. Having too many features can be bad both during training and serving your model for the following reasons:

The more features you have, the more opportunities there are for data leakage.

The more features you have, the more opportunities there are for data leakage.

Too many features can cause overfitting.

Too many features can cause overfitting.

Too many features can increase memory required to serve a model, which, in turn, might require you to use a more expensive machine/instance to serve your model.

Too many features can increase memory required to serve a model, which, in turn, might require you to use a more expensive machine/instance to serve your model.

Too many features can increase inference latency when doing online prediction, especially if you need to extract these features from raw data for predictions online. We’ll go deeper into online prediction inChapter 7.

Too many features can increase inference latency when doing online prediction, especially if you need to extract these features from raw data for predictions online. We’ll go deeper into online prediction inChapter 7.

Useless features becometechnical debts. Whenever your data pipeline changes, all the affected features need to be adjusted accordingly. For example, if one day your application decides to no longer take in information about users’ age, all features that use users’ age need to be updated.

Useless features becometechnical debts. Whenever your data pipeline changes, all the affected features need to be adjusted accordingly. For example, if one day your application decides to no longer take in information about users’ age, all features that use users’ age need to be updated.

In theory, if a feature doesn’t help a model make good predictions, regularization techniques like L1 regularization should reduce that feature’s weight to 0. However, in practice, it might help models learn faster if the features that are no longer useful (and even possibly harmful) are removed, prioritizing good features.

You can store removed features to add them back later. You can also just store general feature definitions to reuse and share across teams in an organization. When talking about feature definition management, some people might think of feature stores as the solution. However, not all feature stores manage feature definitions. We’ll discuss feature stores further inChapter 10.

There are two factors you might want to consider when evaluating whether a feature is good for a model: importance to the model and generalization to unseen data.

Feature Importance

There are many different methods formeasuring a feature’s importance. If you use a classical ML algorithm like boosted gradient trees, the easiest way to measure the importance of your features is to use built-in feature importance functions implementedby XGBoost.17For more model-agnostic methods, you might want to look into SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations).18InterpretMLis a great open source package that leverages feature importance to help you understand how your model makes predictions.

The exact algorithm for feature importance measurement is complex, but intuitively, a feature’s importanceto a model is measured by how much that model’s performance deteriorates if that feature or a set of features containing that feature is removed from the model. SHAP is great because it not only measures a feature’s importance to an entire model, it also measures each feature’s contribution to a model’s specific prediction. Figures5-8and5-9show how SHAP can help you understand the contribution of each feature to a model’s predictions.

Often, a small number of features accounts for a large portion of your model’s feature importance. When measuring feature importance for a click-through rate prediction model, the ads team at Facebook found out that the top 10 features are responsible for about half of the model’s total feature importance, whereas the last 300 features contribute less than 1% feature importance, as shown inFigure 5-10.20

Not only good for choosing the right features, feature importance techniques are also great for interpretability as they help you understand how your models work under the hood.

Feature Generalization

Since the goal of an ML model is to make correct predictions on unseen data, features used for the model shouldgeneralize to unseen data. Not all features generalize equally. For example, for the task of predicting whether a comment is spam, the identifier of each comment is not generalizable at all and shouldn’t be used as a feature for the model. However, the identifier of the user who posts the comment, such as username, might still be useful for a model to make predictions.

Measuring feature generalization is a lot less scientific than measuring feature importance, and it requires both intuition and subject matter expertise on top of statistical knowledge. Overall, there are two aspects you might want to consider with regards to generalization: feature coverage and distribution of feature values.

Coverage is the percentage of the samples that has values for this feature in the data—so the fewer values that are missing, the higher the coverage. A rough rule of thumb is that if this feature appears in a very small percentage of your data, it’s not going to be very generalizable. For example, if you want to build a model to predict whether someone will buy a house in the next 12 months and you think that the number of children someone has will be a good feature, but you can only get this information for 1% of your data, this feature might not be very useful.

This rule of thumb is rough because some features can still be useful even if they are missing in most of your data. This is especially true when the missing values are not at random, which means having the feature or not might be a strong indication of its value. For example, if a feature appears only in 1% of your data, but 99% of the examples with this feature have POSITIVE labels, this feature is useful and you should use it.

Coverage of a feature can differ wildly between different slices of data and even in the same slice of data over time. If the coverage of a feature differs a lot between the train and test split (such as it appears in 90% of the examples in the train split but only in 20% of the examples in the test split), this is an indication that your train and test splits don’t come from the same distribution. You might want to investigate whether the way you split your data makes sense and whether this feature is a cause for data leakage.

For the feature values that are present, you might want to look into their distribution. If the set of values that appears in the seen data (such as the train split) has no overlap with the set of values that appears in the unseen data (such as the test split), this feature might even hurt your model’s performance.

As a concrete example, imagine you want to build a model to estimate the time it will take for a given taxi ride. You retrain this model every week, and you want to use the data from the last six days to predict the ETAs (estimated time of arrival) for today. One of the features is DAY_OF_THE_WEEK, which you think is useful because the traffic on weekdays is usually worse than on the weekend. This feature coverage is 100%, because it’s present in every feature. However, in the train split, the values for this feature are Monday to Saturday, whereas in the test split, the value for this feature is Sunday. If you include this feature in your model without a clever scheme to encode the days, it won’t generalize to the test split, and might harm your model’s performance.

On the other hand, HOUR_OF_THE_DAY is a great feature, because the time in the day affects the traffic too, and the range of values for this feature in the train split overlaps with the test split 100%.

When considering a feature’s generalization, there’s a trade-off between generalization and specificity. You might realize that the traffic during an hour only changes depending on whether that hour is therush hour. So you generate the feature IS_RUSH_HOUR and set it to 1 if the hour is between 7 a.m. and 9 a.m. or between 4 p.m. and 6 p.m. IS_RUSH_HOUR is more generalizable but less specific than HOUR_OF_THE_DAY. Using IS_RUSH_HOUR without HOUR_OF_THE_DAY might cause models to lose important information about the hour.

Summary

Because the success of today’s ML systems still depends on their features, it’s important for organizations interested in using ML in production to invest time and effort into feature engineering.

How to engineer good features is a complex question with no foolproof answers. The best way to learn is through experience: trying out different features and observing how they affect your models’ performance. It’s also possible to learn from experts. I find it extremely useful to read about how the winning teams of Kaggle competitions engineer their features to learn more about their techniques and the considerations they went through.

Feature engineering often involves subject matter expertise, and subject matter experts might not always be engineers, so it’s important to design your workflow in a way that allows nonengineers to contribute to the process.

Here is a summary of best practices for feature engineering:

Split data by time into train/valid/test splits instead of doing it randomly.

Split data by time into train/valid/test splits instead of doing it randomly.

If you oversample your data, do it after splitting.

If you oversample your data, do it after splitting.

Scale and normalize your data after splitting to avoid data leakage.

Scale and normalize your data after splitting to avoid data leakage.

Use statistics from only the train split, instead of the entire data, to scale your features and handle missing values.

Use statistics from only the train split, instead of the entire data, to scale your features and handle missing values.

Understand how your data is generated, collected, and processed. Involve domain experts if possible.

Understand how your data is generated, collected, and processed. Involve domain experts if possible.

Keep track of your data’s lineage.

Keep track of your data’s lineage.

Understand feature importance to your model.

Understand feature importance to your model.

Use features that generalize well.

Use features that generalize well.

Remove no longer useful features from your models.

Remove no longer useful features from your models.

With a set of good features, we’ll move to the next part of the workflow: training ML models. Before we move on, I just want to reiterate that moving to modeling doesn’t mean we’re done with handling data or feature engineering. We are never done with data and features. In most real-world ML projects, the process of collecting data and feature engineering goes on as long as your models are in production. We need to use new, incoming data to continually improve models, which we’ll cover inChapter 9.

1Loris Nanni, Stefano Ghidoni, and Sheryl Brahnam, “Handcrafted vs. Non-handcrafted Features for Computer Vision Classification,”Pattern Recognition71 (November 2017): 158–72,https://oreil.ly/CGfYQ; Wikipedia, s.v. “Feature learning,”https://oreil.ly/fJmwN.

2In my experience, how well a person handles missing values for a given dataset during interviews strongly correlates with how well they will do in their day-to-day jobs.

3Rachel Bogardus Drew, “3 Facts About Marriage and Homeownership,” Joint Center for Housing Studies of Harvard University, December 17, 2014,https://oreil.ly/MWxFp.

4Feature scaling once boosted my model’s performance by almost 10%.

5Changyong Feng, Hongyue Wang, Naiji Lu, Tian Chen, Hua He, Ying Lu, and Xin M. Tu, “Log-Transformation and Its Implications for Data Analysis,”Shanghai Archives of Psychiatry26, no. 2 (April 2014): 105–9,https://oreil.ly/hHJjt.

6“Two Million Brands on Amazon,”Marketplace Pulse, June 11, 2019,https://oreil.ly/zrqtd.

7Wikipedia, s.v. “Feature hashing,”https://oreil.ly/tINTc.

8Lucas Bernardi, “Don’t Be Tricked by the Hashing Trick,” Booking.com, January 10, 2018,https://oreil.ly/VZmaY.

9Huifeng Guo, Ruiming Tang, Yunming Ye, Zhenguo Li, and Xiuqiang He, “DeepFM: A Factorization-Machine Based Neural Network for CTR Prediction,”Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence(IJCAI, 2017),https://oreil.ly/1Vs3v; Jianxun Lian, Xiaohuan Zhou, Fuzheng Zhang, Zhongxia Chen, Xing Xie, and Guangzhong Sun, “xDeepFM: Combining Explicit and Implicit Feature Interactions for Recommender Systems,”arXiv, 2018,https://oreil.ly/WFmFt.

10Flavian Vasile, Elena Smirnova, and Alexis Conneau, “Meta-Prod2Vec—Product Embeddings Using Side-Information for Recommendation,”arXiv, July 25, 2016,https://oreil.ly/KDaEd; “Product Embeddings and Vectors,” Coveo,https://oreil.ly/ShaSY.

11Andrew Zhai, “Representation Learning for Recommender Systems,” August 15, 2021,https://oreil.ly/OchiL.

12Will Douglas Heaven, “Hundreds of AI Tools Have Been Built to Catch Covid. None of Them Helped,”MIT Technology Review, July 30, 2021,https://oreil.ly/Ig1b1.

13Zidmie, “The leak explained!” Kaggle,https://oreil.ly/1JgLj.

14Addison Howard, “Competition Recap—Congratulations to our Winners!” Kaggle,https://oreil.ly/wVUU4.

15Björn Barz and Joachim Denzler, “Do We Train on Test Data? Purging CIFAR of Near-Duplicates,”Journal of Imaging6, no. 6 (2020): 41.

16Michael Roberts, Derek Driggs, Matthew Thorpe, Julian Gilbey, Michael Yeung, Stephan Ursprung, Angelica I. Aviles-Rivero, et al. “Common Pitfalls and Recommendations for Using Machine Learning to Detect and Prognosticate for COVID-19 Using Chest Radiographs and CT Scans,”Nature Machine Intelligence3 (2021): 199–217,https://oreil.ly/TzbKJ.

17With XGBoost functionget_score.

18A great open source Python package for calculating SHAP can be found onGitHub.

19Scott Lundberg, SHAP (SHapley Additive exPlanations), GitHub repository, last accessed 2021,https://oreil.ly/c8qqE.

20Xinran He, Junfeng Pan, Ou Jin, Tianbing Xu, Bo Liu, Tao Xu, Yanxin Shi, et al., “Practical Lessons from Predicting Clicks on Ads at Facebook,” inADKDD ’14: Proceedings of the Eighth International Workshop on Data Mining for Online Advertising(August 2014): 1–9,https://oreil.ly/dHXeC.